This is London,the world ` s largest city .
I have been living here for the past 22 years,I cross this street everyday and everyday it asks me my name .
It asks who is Chaudhary Baldev Singh?Where has he come from? Why has he come?
What reply shall I give it , even after spending half my life the land is stranger to me and I am stranger to it .
Mom ! For the last 20 years dad has been going to the same place everyday , uses the same way , yet you call him everyday and ask , ` Have you reached ` ?
You will not be able to understand it, Just understand this that it has now become a habit for me.
Miss Lucy is right when she says if habits are not changed at the right time , they become the need.
Again you started philosophizing, You are only 12 years old now, talk like people of your age, why do you talk like elderly people?
Come-on Mom!There is nothing like childhood & youth , age is only a number , a person is only as old as he feels.
Alright darling I lost, I lost.
Now you head towards your school and annoy your dear Miss Lucy.
Oh!Don ` t feel shy in front of me, look when a girl comes of age her mother doesn ` t remain her mother, becomes her friend.
Hey Simi! You have started writing very good poetry , the guy seems to be quite good but who is he?
Mom , he is unseen, unknown.
Oh! This means there is nobody like that , I was wondering where one finds such guys these days.
You are such a crazy girl , you have never seen him nor met and you started dreaming.
No Mom , this is not a dream , I admit I have never met him , never seen him, but he is there, somewhere or the other.
Hey Raj! Who told you to party last night?
When You party at night , you don ` t sleep and when you don ` t sleep how can you wake up the next morning?
See now we are late for the graduation ceremony.
I have heard that somebody has failed this year and the dean has decided to announce his name in front of everybody.
Today you have made Dharmaveer Malhotra feel proud.
I knew, I knew that one day you will definitely add laurels to your father ` s name.
Failing in the examinations and not studying is the tradition of our family and I am happy that you have kept it alive.
In fact you went two steps ahead of your forefathers.
We all have failed in India but you showed your worth by failing in London.
I am utterly happy , studying is useless, filling your minds with books doesn ` t fill your pockets.
Look at me , a careless uneducated lout escaped from Bhatinda has today become the millionaire of London.
That is why I say , everything that happens , happens for the best, do one thing , join the office from tomorrow.
Father! You are right , I should look after your business , actually the thing is, you have now become very old.
Pops, I have decided that I will not go to Europe and I am joining the office from tomorrow.
Look ,your father can only take decisions in this house and I have decided that You will not go to the office but to Europe.
No Pops , I have had a lot of fun , I have lived my entire youth.
I had forgotten Mom that I do not even have the right to dream.
No daughter , dream definitely dream , but do not keep a condition for them to be true , and then who knows Kuljeet could be your dream.
You were this little when we had brought you here and look at yourself now.
It is said that when a daughter becomes youthful , the father gets worried.
But when the daughter is like you the father doesn ` t gets worried he rather puffs up with pride.
Babuji , will you fulfill my wish if I ask you for something?
Ask for anything my child.
Babuji , I want to see Europe , there is a one month trip for Zurich , all my friends are going.
Who I am going to get married to is a totally strange person yet I do not have any complaints Babuji.
You must have decided a better future for me , but Babuji, I will not get the same chance again.
You have been troubling me since I have met you , you have annoyed me the whole trip.
Every time there is a problem with you and because of you only I have missed my train today.
I want to safely reach Zurich now therefore you take your way and I will take mine.
Come-on Senorita , we have the same destination , our ways are same and we even have to catch the same train.
Then what is the point of parting ways and it is also essential for a girl like you to be in the company of a boy like me.
Let ` s go and inquire in the house at the front we might get a place to stay there.
The arrangement for spending the night has been done , Simran I must say you have got a good choice.
By the way you were absolutely right Senorita, the adventure we are having here wouldn ` t have been possible in that room.
I know what you think of me , you think that I am a very sleazy kind of loafer boy.
I cannot even imagine playing such a trick on you , trust me Simran.
I am telling the truth , nothing had happened last night , it was just a joke.
Please do not crack such jokes again! You don ` t know what I could have done.
I promise you, I will not crack such jokes again.
Change your clothes quickly, we have to catch the bus.
Senorita! There are fifteen more minutes for the bus to leave , eat something if you are hungry.
What shall we see from inside, the church is not something to see, I don ` t want to go.
No , Let ` s sit for some more time , have tea & snacks and then leave.
One should not disclose what one pleads to the god.
I have full faith that whatever is asked for with the clear thought and true heart , gets fulfilled.
If this postcard reaches my home then my father will think that I am alive no more.
I have not been serious yet and if in the future I be serious it will be only one time, it would be when I fall in love.
Senorita,I never loved anybody, I did not find anyone.
A girl by seeing whom all the wishes of the heart, dreams and colours become alive.
It has not happened yet , but it seems as if some unseen , strange face is calling from the clouds.
I Don ` t know when the clouds will move and when that girl will be visible.
Hasn ` t this ever happened to you, an unseen, unknown stranger has never come in your dreams?
There is no space for a stranger and unseen person into my dreams , my marriage has been fixed.
You haven ` t seen the guy to whom you are getting married?
You will spend all your life with a person , whom you don ` t know , have never met , and who is a total stranger for you.
I want to tell you something Simran , I have fallen in love with you.
Just look at your face, you thought that I am serious, didn ` t you?
Come on Simran , you know me for so many days yet you could not understand me.
Remember I had once said that I have never been serious till now.
Hey brother , this love and all is not my cup of tea.
I just can ` t understand how can anybody spend his whole life with only one person.
Will you go back and marry that stranger or you will have the courage to love me?
Raj!If she loves you then she will turn back to look, turn, turn!
It has been more than a month we have reached London and we did not even realize it.
Hey Raj! You did not give me your address , I will send you my wedding card , You will come right?
I had read, heard that love is like this, love is like that but never felt it.
I did not even realize when I first held his hand , I stayed with him for so many days yet I did not understand anything.
But today at the station when we separated , for the first time I felt that after this moment I will never meet him again.
I turned back and kept looking him again and again but he kept on going.
I wanted to stop him , wanted to say something , wanted to hear something , he did not stop but I understood that love happens like this.
I do not know whether he loves me or not.
I just know that he is my life , I cannot belong to anyone else Mom.
The girl has come after so many days, I did not even have the slightest idea of the time.
I had told you not to betray my trust , I had taken your promise, yet you betrayed me.
Pack your bags, we are leaving for India tomorrow morning,forever.
Let her cry , she has herself written these tears in her destiny , she herself has to deal with it.
What is her name whose face you are trying to see in the moon?
You know me so well , I am not among those who keep running after only one girl.
Pops , the problem is that she is going to get married.
Your times were different Pops , now the time has changed.
Till date the name of love is love, it has not changed and it will never change.
We are among those who do not see the moon , we lift it down and bring it home with us.
Now go and come to this house only when my daughter-in-law is with you, understood.
They left this place, their daughter is getting married, they sold all the things and went back to Punjab.
Son! I had stopped these tears for twenty years inside my eyes, they will not stop today.
You have become the bride ` s aunt now, search a good groom for yourself.
Lajo! I am ready for the marriage since long, but I don ` t think anybody is fit for marrying me in this community, so what should I do?
I think some foreigner will have to come for me.
It is great! The whole generation has grown youthful in twenty years.
When I was a little girl your maternal grand father used to teach me that there is no difference between a man and a woman.
What is one's right is also the other's right.
I lived all my childhood assuming this to be true.
But as I grew old I understood , it was a lie.
As the education of my brothers was more important , my studies were stopped , that was my first sacrifice.
Thereafter at every step , sometimes as a daughter , sometimes as a wife , I went on sacrificing my happiness.
She will not sacrifice herself by being a daughter,sister and wife at every step.
So what if she is a girl , she will live her life according to her will , she will have all the happiness she deserves.
But I was wrong Simran, I forgot that a woman does not even has the right to make any promise.
She is born to sacrifice for men.
Men never sacrifice for women , neither will they sacrifice.
Today your mother has come to take away your happiness, forget him child.
Your father will not understand your agony, so for the sake of everybody, I beg you, forget him dear girl.
You are right mother , I am such an idiot I do not even know whether he loves me or not.
After all bauji is my father, he has always thought about my happiness.
Can ` t I make a little sacrifice for his happiness?
Mom go and tell Bauji that I am ready for the marriage , now he doesn ` t need to bear the pain from my side.
Baldev! I don ` t know why but one thing is troubling me , I have seen a kind of sadness in Simran ` s eyes.
Even in her laughter there is a hesitation , is everything alright?
Nothing Mom , It ` s a new place , people are new , the environment is new , she will gradually recover.
You don ` t know what is happening in that house Raj , day after tomorrow is my engagement and after fifteen days , it ` s my marriage.
All the arrangements have been made , Bauji has promised his friend and his promise is his life.
We must elope from here Raj, we must elope.
No Simran, I have not come here to elope with you.
Though I was born in England but I am an Indian , I have come here to make you my bride.
I know what I ` m doing is very difficult, but I have full faith in our love.
Simran! I cannot walk alone on this path , you have to walk along with me being my strength.
If Raj wouldn ` t have arrived at the right moment , the hunter himself would have become the victim , Really Raj you owned me.
Son, you have done a great favor by saving Kuljeet ` s life.
Get ready quickly, we have to go to Baldev ` s house for dinner , Its his daughter whom my son Kuljeet is getting married to.
Aunty! This is Raj , my NRI friend , about whom I spoke to you.
Now you leave this, I ` ll do it.
Oh no , you are from the groom ` s side , you are our guest.
You are amazing Maaji , at one moment you made me your son and at the next moment you estranged me.
Its an auspicious day today , for the first time I ` ve seen Simran laughing wholeheartedly.
Actually Maaji , my mother used to say that anybody who serves at wedding gets a very beautiful wife.
Alright! So you are doing all this to get a beautiful wife.
Nowadays only lucky people get good wives, Maaji.
Do you know why is the engagement ring worn on this finger?
Because the vein of this finger goes directly into the heart , I cannot wear someone else ` s ring, except you.
All this is a big joke for you , you can never imagine what is going on with me.
I understand everything Simran , your pain , your yearning , your tears , but why don ` t you understand it is just the beginning.
Bauji You were amazing last day! You beat everyone with your wonderful dance.
Darling! I have decided that I ` ll definitely talk to Raj today.
I want this friendship to turn into a relationship , I put up the proposal of my daughter Preeti for you.
You are amazing , why do you need my consent for such a good work?
Have I ever overlooked any of your talks?
Samdhan Jee! Sweeten our mouths, your son-in-law has come, the marriage should take place as soon as possible, there shouldn ` t be any delay for a good work.
Tomorrow is my first Karwachauth and I want you give me the first sip of water and the first bite of food.
Hey , have you gone mad! I ` ll come in front of everybody and say hi simran! I ` m your would be husband , come on! drink water.
Sister! It is not that easy for him to come.
Everyone keeps asking all the time, where ` s Raj?
He will not be able to come sister, please eat something.
Sorry I got late, they were not letting me come.
With great difficulty I have rescued myself, come on eat.
Little sister! Tell him that he doesn ` t needs to get worried.
When I was dizzy from hunger here , he was gorging himself with food.
Anyways this is my first Karwachauth, he doesn ` t needs to get so upset.
Whether I die or live , why shall he get worried?
Oh god sister! You don ` t know but Raj has also not eaten anything since morning.
He said that he will eat with you and had asked me not to tell you.
Sorry Raj! But I can ` t remain quiet anymore.
I do not want to hear anything, I have seen everything.
I know Raj is the same guy whom you had met in Europe.
And I also know this that you both love each other a lot.
My blessing is with you, take her along with you, elope with her.
Nobody will understand your love here.
Maaji! I was very little when my mother had passed away , whatever I am today is because of her.
She always used to tell me one thing , which I have not forgotten till today.
She used to say , son at every turn of your life you will get two paths , one would be right and the other would be wrong.
The wrong path would be very easy , it will pull you towards itself and the right one would be very difficult.
If you will choose the wrong way, then at the beginning you might get all the happiness but at the end You will be the loser.
And if you choose the right path , then in the beginning even if you face difficulties at the end you will always win.
Now you tell me , Maaji , whether I have chosen the right way or wrong?
If I had to run away with Simran I could have done it before.
But I do not want to snatch her but possess her.
I want to take her not by stealing eyes but I want to take her in front of everybody.
I have come to take my bride with me.
But I will go back only when Bauji will himself give Simran ` s hands to me.
Now don ` t bother about simran , she is my responsibility.
You were right, I could not recognize you.
You have played with the dignity of my family.
You have betrayed us, took advantage of our trust, and mocked our decency.
How dare you fall in love with Simran?
How did you decide that you will marry her?
You are not even responsible to take care of yourself then how can you deserve Simran?
My perception about you was absolutely correct.
Tramps like you do not improve rather deteriorate.
I had told you to take me away with you from here, I had told you that nobody will understand our love here, I had told you that we should elope.
No Simran! People run away from the outsiders , where could we go if we had eloped?
We do not have any right to build the castles of our happiness by hurting them.
Bauji is right, I am a liar and a deceit.
So what I had told a lie in order to own you, after all its a lie.
Bauji here is your asset , I did not come here to break anyone ` s heart.
I had come here to win your heart but there must have been some problem with me only that I could not win your heart fully.
Allow me to go bauji, please allow me.
Bauji Raj is my life, I cannot live without him, please let me go with my Raj.
Go Simran , nobody can love you like this guy.
Go child , go with your Raj , go and live your life.
Filling water is so painful.
Uncle was speaking to aunt that this time when the crop is harvested he will get the tube well installed , then there will be no problem in filling water.
Fill the water whenever you wish when there is a tube well installed at your doorstep, but pull the bucket now, even I need to fill my bucket.
Why are you getting angry at me, whether I have thrown your bucket into the well, You have yourself drowned it.
What sort of sleep is this?I have been calling you for long , can ` t you hear that ?
I heard it , but how would I know whether you were calling me or someone else?
I thought I was dreaming and somebody was calling in the dream itself.
Early morning you came here to trouble me, take the hook and come.
Whenever there is a problem the poor girl comes asking for Chandan ` s help , go and pull out her bucket.
Chandan! Come, have food.
You have not had anything thing since morning , do you want to keep a fast?
Since morning he is lying on the bed , he is trying his own medicine but there is no relief.
I ` ll wait till tonight if it remains the same then I will call the doctor from Chaubepur for the treatment tomorrow morning.
Don ` t waste your money in these doctors,wait for few days and see.
Hey gentleman!just to save a few pennies you are yourself anxious and also troubling the children.
Omkar! Believe me and call the doctor tomorrow, understood?
Where is the doctor ` s house?
You live at Chaubepur and you do not know where the doctor lives.
Hey brother! I have followed the right directions but what can I do if the narrated direction is wrong.
Is this the way to barge inside the house and then ask for the way?
I am going brother! Can you please tell me where the doctor lives?
You have to wait a little , sit here for sometime , I will get ready and come.
Hey, where is the boat? I had left it here itself.
It is only because of the girls of Chaubepur.
When I had come here, they were all washing their utensils, they must have pushed it.
One among them was your daughter, ask her.
Tiwari jee In fact your disease is chronic , you did not notice it before that is why it has become wrecked.
Now complete recovery will take time.
People should refrain themselves while eating with growing age.
Hey! Why do you worry about the price? Everything will be done according to your happiness , but follow my instructions , eat medicine , refrain yourself from what you are not asked to eat.
But Doctor you had said that it will take longer to recover.
Come after three days and tell me the improvements.
Gunja! Have you drowned the boat of the guy who had come to meet me in the morning?
Anyways, Don ` t fight with him if he comes again, talk nicely.
I don ` t need to talk to him. Do I fight with everybody?
Uncle! How are you feeling now?
Uncle! Could you please send Chandan with me? I need to pluck the amlas.
Chandan is the only person left to pluck the Amlas?Aren ` t there any servants at your house?
He is always crooked with me.
Uncle! I don ` t have time, I have to go to Chaubepur to get your medicines.
Go and pluck the amlas, leave for Chabepur from there itself.
Come slowly , I ` ll go ahead and pluck lots of amlas.
I don ` t have time to sit madam! I had told you before that I have to go to Chaubepur .
Oh my god! the way you are calling out Chaubepur again and again seems fishy.
Doctor! Is the doctor at home?
I am again giving you the dose for seven days and if by chance I happen to visit there, I ` ll see you.
This boy has an elder brother too named Omkar, I have chosen him for Rupa.
Let the right time come then we will talk about the proposal.
Chandan!Please do me a favor, get me a chilli from the pickle pot.
Alright , if not whole then at least bring half the chilli , I want to give a change to my taste buds.
Finish eating , I ` ll get you medicine to give a change to your taste buds.
What has happened Uncle?
Dear Omkar!Release me from the medicine , it is too much now.
Chandan! Is the doctor supposed to come tomorrow?
No, he has asked me to get the medicines.
Ok then, I ` ll visit the doctor ` s house, ask him not to give the medicines and pay his fees.
Why will you go there to pay the bill, whenever he visits here, we will calculate the bill.
Uncle, will you bargain with him?
Brother! Beware of the doctor ` s daughter,she quarrels a lot.
No Son! Medicine and abstinence both are necessary.
Sick people are like children , if you pay attention to their stubbornness , you cannot treat them.
Do onething, get the medicine, I ` ll see him the next week when I come.
Oh yes , what is the bill of your medicines? Take that also from me.
Oh! why do you worry about the price? I ` ll talk to your uncle when I come.
No, Uncle doesn ` t understands the calculations, I do it for him.
Please have some sherbet , this is my younger daughter Gunja, she is very naughty.
Good morning Tiwary jee! How are you feeling now?
I am absolutely fine because of your good wishes.
Are you sure you don ` t have any kind of ailments?
Though uncle doesn ` t complaint much but it is a chronic illness doctor.
You treated his illness but did not take any fee.
I have come to ask for the fee.
No doctor! I will pay you whatever I can afford.
I want your nephew Omkar to marry my daughter , if there is any demand for the dowry then.
No doctor! Please don ` t talk about dowry in front of me.
I want to remain away from the tradition which is drowning the society.
You chose my son , kept the proposal , we accepted it , what is the issue of dowry then?
I will put the ring into the water of this plate thrice , whoever discovers it amongst the sister and the brother-in-law the other person has to obey them.
I will support my sister, why don ` t you support your brother and make him win?
Really , now I realize that my life was abandoned without you.
The vehicle was anyhow being pulled with one wheel , now there is the other wheel also , both can now balance each other.
Let me see, Everything has changed, the days have changed, the nights have changed.
Hey Brother! That Ramjanak is standing out , he is asking whether you will go to the field or he shall go alone?
Why won ` t I go brother , how will I feed my wife if I don ` t work?
Bhauji! Do you still miss Gunja?
You must not be feeling good here.
Why? You are here to entertain me , your behavior is exactly like her.
But Bhauji , You don ` t even know me much.
I have heard a lot about you from your brother, he says a brother like you is rare.
Bhauji! Elder brother loves me a lot that is why he says this.
Hey! I have heard that the bride has cooked yummy halwa today.
hey! I did not even eat it then how did it get finished?
Alright , Eat it since Bhauji has served it today but try to come and eat on time else she will remain hungry.
You have not been to Balihar since long.
Yes, there was no work there.
You could have brought some news of Rupa if you had gone there.
Father , bring the sister here.It has been long , we have met her , we miss her a lot , please bring her here.
How can I bring her just like that. There are lots of work at a farmer ` s house, she is busy in her household, she is happy, what else do we need?
Hey Bhauji! Why are you sitting like this? what ` s the matter? Are you not well?
Then why do you look so upset?
Do I look upset? It is just a little bit of tiredness , that is why I sat.
Hey! Tell me what is the work, I will do it.
Bring me a sister-in-law, I won ` t do it then.
Tell me the truth, whether there is something wrong with your health.
Uncle! I was telling this that why not we bring my younger sister here just for few days.
Hey! Why didn ` t I think about this, it will resolve most of my concerns.
Alright then, send Chandan tomorrow.
Bhauji! Where is Gunja?
Gunja has gone to play holi with the girls, she might be at Rajjo ` s house.
You thought of playing holi with me after taking bath?
How could my holi be complete without playing with you?
Shall I ask you something? Who am I for you?
How do you name a relationship which gets connected without saying anything?You only answer.
Both of us have understood it,now what is the need of naming it?
Has the doctor sent Gunja to stay here forever?
Omkar! All our work got over with good omen , Gunja should be sent to her house now.
The girl has now become such familiar with everybody that no one can call her an outsider.
Tomorrow is tuesday, an auspicious day, send her back.
Everyone says whatever you ask for from `` Dipasatti `` gets fulfilled, Why don ` t you make a wish.
If you get a groom of your choice then I will get everything.
Chandan! Let ` s go and eat at home.
No dear! You go and eat, I am not at all hungry.
No , You also come along with me , otherwise who will give answers to Bhauji ` s interrogations?
Chandan! We are going to the temple, will you come along?
No, I don ` t feel like going, You all go, I will stay here itself at the house.
Finally you remembered me today.
We remember them whom we forget , I never forgot you.
To tell you the truth Gunja! since when you have come, I don ` t feel happy at home anytime.
Hey Chandan! Come inside dear son , how did you manage to come in this rain?
Oh, you have got cold.
Son, take this medicine first and then drink this milk after having the laddoo.
Eat the laddoo first, Gunja has made them the last day.
But where is she? I can ` t see her.
She has gone to attend the wedding at Phulesari ` s maternal house.
Chandan! Will you do me a favor , could you please drop me to Chaubepur tomorrow?
I feel like meeting everybody , and my mother also wanted to see the child.
Alright , we ` ll definitely go.
Mother! The sister has come.
Hey! What are you both talking about here away from the others.
Hey Chandan! Tell me how do you feel?
Alright, don ` t tell me but I have understood everything.
Hey! where are you going?Wait here and tell me do you like Chandan? Do you want to marry him?
I will talk to your elder brother after going back and fix everything and then i ` ll get you both married after informing Babuji. Are you happy now?
Uncle! I was thinking something.
How is it if we get Chandan married?
Hey son! You just uttered my words, I was about to tell you the same thing.
Then fix everything as soon as possible after inquiring.
Rajjo! What are you saying? Both of us are marrying each other?
What? You don ` t love me? Then whom do you love?
Me and Gunja love each other.
Rajjo! the soul is always one , its not two and I dont ` t know when did it became Gunja ` s , even I could not understand.
Chandan! Where is your elder brother Omkar?
Call him , your Bhauji has fallen down from the stairs , there is a lot of bleeding from the head , the situation is very critical.
Omkar! Why are you sitting alone and quiet in this dark?
She was not our ` s , she was a detached person , she had come for a few days to shower love upon us.
Listen, what will you gain by thinking so much?
She is taken away by whom she belonged , you cannot fight with the destiny, happiness and sorrow is the part of life , we have to live with it.
Yes son! We all have to be together and patiently bear this pain.
Doctor! I feel a bride is utterly needed in this house, but nobody listens to me.
No, I cannot put the baby ` s life into more trouble by bringing a step-mother.
Hey!Step-mothers are not always bad, and after all we all are there to look after the baby, how will the baby be in trouble?
I have an idea looking into the situation, shall I speak?
Dear Omkar! All the problems will be solved if you marry Gunja.
We have to get her married too, and you know the baby is so much familiar to Gunja.
Gunja is known to this house , you all also know her , the baby will never come to know whether Gunja is his mother or not.
So Chandan! What do you say?
I agree with whatever my elder brother is happy.
Uncle! She thought that you had fixed her marriage with Chandan.
She loves Chandan and he also loves her.
But why didn ` t Chandan speak anything when the talk about the marriage initiated that day,even he was there.
Listen to me once Gunja , you can remain angry with me then for the rest of your life.
I don ` t have the right to be angry at you now.
Whatever little right I had upon you, you took that away.
But I cannot understand one thing that what was the matter for which you took the revenge from me?
I had complete trust on you Chandan! I thought that if my love and affection has strength, I will definitely get you.
Love and affection is not everything in life Gunja,there is also a duty.
You came much later Gunja, when I grew-up elder brother was the first person I knew , I do not even remember the faces of my parents.
I am ready to sacrifice everything for his happiness.
Gunja! It was not about only me , it was about elder brother ` s happiness , it was about the house whom Bhauji had decorated with love , it was about the baby.
That it why I thought that only you are the right person to look after that house and remained quiet.
Gunja! I had full confidence that when you will listen to my helplessness , you will understand it and forgive me.
You are great Chandan! I only loved you before but now I will respect you.
Even when the priest doesn ` t get the god , he never leaves his devotion.
I will never betray your trust Chandan, I will obey whatever you ` ll say.
What were you talking,you will sacrifice your happiness for me and I will be happy, what do you think of me?
Gunja! Don ` t worry , this god will be your husband , I will go and talk about it now.
Doctor! Our happiness is in the happiness of our children,Let Chandan marry Gunja now.
Tina is very critical Rahul, she doesn ` t have much time.
We tried a lot Rahul but her internal bleeding increased so much that we could not do anything.
I had told her earlier that she will face complications in her delivery.
But she also knew how much you wanted this child.
She also loved this child more than her life.
I want my daughter to know me.
How was her mother, who was she, she could answer these questions herself.
Mamma! I am leaving this letters with you.
These letters have all those things which I want to convey to my daughter.
They will remain as memories for my daughter.
Rupa will recite us the Gayatri Mantra.
I forgot the Gayatri Mantra.
What? What are you saying Rupa? Did you listen sisters? Our Rupa forgot the Gayatri Mantra.
Oh dear! What will you teach your children If you do not pay heed to prayers and devotion.
Whatever we say , whatever we think , our children get the same effect.
Go and get ready for the school function.
Each student will be given only one minute.
Our first contestant is Jasbinder Singh.
My topic is Puja.
We worship Wahe Guru every morning.
Papa says that Wahe Guru will be happy with prayers and he will protect us.
But mummy says that grandmother will be happy with prayers and she will leave us a big house.
Puja Bhatt is my favorite actress and the name of my best friend is also Puja.
A mother is that who loves us so much that sometimes we do not even understand that love.
A mother is one who makes us realize how good we are and there is nobody as good as us.
A mother is one who loves our laughter , who suffers because of our suffering.
A mother is one without whom we cannot live.
Mother is everything , but I do not have.
But I have father and he is also very nice.
You know Rahul, Sharma jee had called up.
Our Delhi ` s neighbor has sent a marriage proposal.
He was saying that the girl is beautiful and cultured.
But I flatly refused.
In any case , I don ` t do anything wrong.
So what the girl is beautiful and gentle?
Nowadays every girl is gentle and beautiful.
Would not you remarry?
Mom! We live only once , die only once , we get married once and we fall in love also once , not again and again.
You will take care of yourself son , but what about Anjali?
Don ` t you think she needs a mother?
She is alright because she has that what even I don ` t have, her mother ` s letters.
My dear Anjali, Happy Birthday.
Today you are eight years old , and I am sure you are just like your father.
The same eyes , the same face .Isn ` t it Anjali?
No, I am like you.
Does Your father still wear shoes while sleeping at night?
When will he leave this habit?
Today I ` m going to tell you a story.
Me,your father and Anjali are there in this story.
I cannot wake up early morning.
You cannot wake up or you got scared?
Hey Rahul Khanna is not afraid of anyone.
But loses everyday in basketball with Anjali Sharma.
Do not cry like girls.
Hey! Do not call me a girl.
You are not a girl.
At least I ` m not like those stupid girls after whom you keep running.
I do not run after girls , they run after me.
You never know when friendship turns into love.
Malhotra You were saying something?
I was just saying that it is forbidden to wear short skirts in college.
But nowadays that is fashionable, Malhotra.
But Malhotra, you wear boring clothes.
Mrs Malhotra was alive until then and occasionally I would wear fancy clothes for her.
Whats the matter sir, You look so happy today?
It is because my daughter is coming back today.
Today, Tina is coming back from London.
Yes, she used to study there at Oxford University.
Because we all used to stay there before.
But when Mrs Malhotra passed away I did not feel like staying there and I decided to come back to my country.
Didn ` t Tina come back with you?
No, she had to finish her studies.
But then I started missing her a lot that is why she said that she will complete the last year of her college studies in our college.
After all our college is no less than Oxford University.
My child, will you take care of Tina?
You know , I am the first girl whom Rahul has tied the friendship band.
You know Sonia, I am being friends only with you.
You wasted my half an hour.
Don ` t you get tired running after these stupid girls?
But Can ` t you find a single girl , who is also beautiful and has little brains too.
Where will I get such a girl?
Anyways, I pass my time with these girls because I have not found her yet.
Because I have still not found that girl, the mere sight of whose makes me feel something.
Everybody stands still when she walks,and the time stops when she stops her step.
What will you do when you find her?
I will lean in front of her, spread my arms and say, Hey,whoever you are, I love you.
So Tina, Today is your first day in college?
How was your first day in college here?
Why?Did something happen?
No, She is not of my type.
She is not an Indian , she has been brought up in London and these London girls are peculiar.
Look , a girl is one whom you can take home to your mother.
You will not find anyone like this, understood!
If I don ` t find anybody, I will marry you.
Anyways nobody is going to marry you.
There is a rule of our college, we make every new student sing.
Rahul! she is Principal sir ` s daughter.
So what, we cannot break our rule for anybody.
Look, you sing a song in hindi for us and the entire college.
why? Did you forget hindi after going to London?
Rahul! How can she sing a song in hindi?
I did not forget my manners even after staying and studying in London.
We are going to start something new today.
But before beginning, I would like to ask you that what do you know about love?
Love is friendship.
If she cannot be my best friend then I can never love her.
Because one cannot Love without friendship.
Our college shall be the best in tomorrow ` s competition Malhotra.
The students of other colleges shall be stunned.
Anjali! Since when do you know Rahul?
Rahul is your best friend right?
Don ` t you love him?
My dad used to say that a man bows his head only in front of three women.
In front of his mother , in front of goddess Durga and...
Rahul! you are here at this time?
Actually I could not sleep and I thought you also must not be feeling sleepy and since you are awake you must be thinking only about me.
Don ` t you think it is too hot here.
Rahul what are you doing?
Anjali! I had come to meet you only.
It is said that a when you make a wish, seeing a falling star, it gets fulfilled.
How am I looking?
I wanted to look beautiful like you, but I don ` t know anything.
Actually you are very beautiful because you are very different from the others.
And you know, you can get anybody if you wish.
You cannot hide anything from me.
But Rahul, didn ` t you find anyone else?
Actually , had it been anyone else at Rahul ` s place I would have equally felt bad.
Did you convey him your feelings?
Tina! I know Rahul loves only you.
I had never thought that someday I will say this to anybody.
I hope I am able to say all this to her.
You know , I thought so many times to speak to him.
My first love is left unfinished sister Rifat.
I am not coming back Rahul.
You are leaving the college.
You didn ` t inform me you are leaving me.
Anjali cannot get married before december.
I had heard about God ` s mercy , but also saw it today , the wish of the girl got fulfilled.
Anjali! Shall I ask you something? Are You happy dear?
What kind of a question is this mother? Of course I am happy.
I am engaged.
Aman is a very nice guy.
He loves me a lot.
But do you also love him?
Mother, I have fallen in love , I might not fall in love again , you can consider it to be a compromise.
I had never thought that my daughter will make a compromise but would not love.
I am also a mother , don ` t I want that you stay happy and get married?
But a home that is built on the pillars of compromise but not love is not a home daughter but a house.
Anjali! You have a call.
I have a small problem.
You don ` t leave me like this.
Aman! I don ` t know who is there at the other side of the phone?
Aman! You know every year I go to the summer camp to teach singing and dancing to the children there.
Those kids have now become a part of my life.
Why do I feel that you don ` t love me?
You go to Shimla for your summer camp.
You are not going to any summer camp.
Dear! There is a lot of snowfall there.
Papa! I have heard that they also teach singing and dancing there and you know how much I love it.
When I have refused once, no one will go.
But it doesn ` t mean that you are going for the summer camp.
Anjali!That is alright we will go for the summer camp but your father will not be coming there right?
My Anjali, is more beautiful than your Anjali.
Dear Papa! Sorry, Grandmother and me came here without informing you.
Dear God! Please make my father happy and give him so much that he doesn ` t miss me much.
You know , he cannot do anything without me.
What shall I ask for mummy to the god, she is with him only.
She can ask him whatever she wants.
Anjali! where have you disappeared?
You know that I will be very lonely without you.
Who is this Anjali?
Anjali is my eight years daughter.
Anjali!Are you alright?
I did not know about Tina.
How would you know, You totally disappeared.
When I needed a friend, you were not there.
Girls cannot play basketball.
He told you the truth and you started fighting with him?
Why? Didn ` t Miss Anjali used to beat you in basketball everyday in college.
She didn ` t beat me everyday but sometimes.
Recall Anjali! You lost everyday.
I challenge you now itself, play with me.
Hi Tina! If you were with us today you would have proudly said that Anjali is my daughter.
Because she is very nice, after all her name is Anjali.
But you know, what is very nice about her, she is exactly like you.
Isn ` t Anjali looking very nice in this photograph?
She is not here that is why you see her photo everyday and become happy.
Aman the wedding is in December , why don ` t you come from London?
But I feel she doesn ` t loves me.
Men are very weak dear daughter, they are very weak.
They make principles but they forget that no principle works before love.
And we make these stubborn , weak men believe that the relationships of heart are made from beat not from these principles.
But these relationships are formed by speaking out the heart.
You speak out your feelings Anjali.
Sometimes revealing the feelings of heart also leads to heart break.
The situation will remain the same even when you don ` t say anything.
Aman told me that you are getting married.
Aman! I want to go back tonight itself.
You had given this to Tina when she was beginning a new life.
You are also starting a new life today.
I know that you and Rahul will stay happy together.
You begin the arrangements for the marriage, I cannot delay more.
But Anjali! The saint had said that there is no auspicious date before December.
Mom! happiness is brought not by the dates but by fate.
Anjali decided for the marriage so soon that I could not even make the arrangements properly.
You know , I always wanted to see that love in your eyes which exists in mine.
And I can see that love today, but it is not for me.
Since when you have understood love, known about it, you have loved only him.
Rahul is your first love and ask me what is first love, you were going to lose everything for me.
I cannot come in between this love, it was never mine.
Anyways someone has told me that I am so handsome that I can get anybody.
Match is scheduled to begin in a short while and we are going to tell you the live commentary.
The speed of whose ball is faster than wind is now going to appear before you.
Truly speaking Bhai Sahab , the more we compliment our son Rajesh it would be less.
Handling a big business at such a less age is not a game.
Rajesh and Prem were very little when sister and brother-in-law passed away.
You left your college studies to bear the responsibility of these children and began with a small job.
You made hard work the goal of your life for their future.
You gave such good values to the children,that is why Rajesh is such a big name and Prem has also topped in MBA this year.
Few days back, I had gone to Pune for Professor ` s conference, I met Prof.S.S. Chaudhary there.
I met his elder daughter there , saw her only once but I still remember her.
Her name is Puja , she has passed B.A , and is very sweet by nature.
The Professor has now gone on Pilgrimage to Ramtekri with his family, we can meet him as he comes back home.
Whenever we talk to Rajesh about the marriage , he avoids it, how can we make them meet in such a situation.
Your meeting stretched for long today?What did the foreign collaborators say?
If everything goes according to the plan then as u had said this factory will not have any competitors.
Your brother is setting up such a big factory to launch you in business.
We have decided to go to Ramtekri these holidays.
But Kaka! You had said that you wanted to go to some hill station.
Hurry up Papa,mummy will get angry if she catches you doing this experiment in the kitchen.
But if she looks at these kachoris once, she will break her fast.
Dear Puja, when Lord Ram broke Lord Shiva ` s bow then Lord Parshuram asked thunderously that who broke this bow?
Lord Rama answered in a very loving and simple way.
Both of us cannot beat you , only Nisha can beat you.
Papa has sent the library books and has said thank you.
Dear Nisha! Can you do a favor?
Can you check the total of this bill until I come from store room?
Can you please tell me Prof. Chaudhary is staying in which room?
Yes of course! You people do not study throughout the year , peep into your neighbors ` during exams and then come here to get your numbers increased.
Increase the number of your spectacles madam!
What do think of yourself sitting at the manager ` s chair?
What Nisha!Mummy is looking for you since long, what are you doing here?
You were inquiring about Prof. Chaudhary, they are his daughters Puja and Nisha, and dear Puja he is Mr. Kailashnath, your father ` s friend.
Manager sahab, check the total of the bill again.
People say that beautiful girls always get confused while totaling.
Eat it with dry mango powder ` s chutney, you will forget the kachoris of Mathura.
Really Kailash nath jee! When we read your name in the newspapers we feel so proud of you.
Dear Prem! Perhaps you do not know our history, three of us used to study in the same college and used to enjoy a lot.
We liked your elder daughter a lot for my nephew.
God has given me everything , the love of these children , big business , but the house patio is empty.
Rajesh has still played in his mother ` s lap but Prem is still deprived of that mothering.
Did you see Mamaji , even Tuffy knows that elder brother ` s in laws are coming with engagement omen.
You fixed Rajesh ` s marriage, chose the bride and we are being informed now?
We are very angry today, we will neither eat anything nor drink, we are going.
Did you see Prem , he told me that Razia Begam, I am very angry , don ` t talk to anybody and see all his anger vanished seeing the bride ` s picture.
I have listened to Doctor Aunty ` s talk , now this is your turn to choose the bride.
Whenever I want to talk to you , someone or another calls you but I know how to win your heart.
So , this halwa is being cooked for Prem Bhaiya and that too after reading from this book.
Congratulations Bhai Sahab!I am utterly happy since I have heard about Rajesh ` s engagement.
I have heard that the bride ` s father is a college Professor then there must not have been any talk about the dowry.
He must been a Professor throughout his life, wouldn ` t have got the chance to save money.
Don ` t say like this wife , they are a thoroughly rich family.
If my sister had come she would have brought so much that you would get tired filling your cash chest , Rajesh is a real gem.
Hey Rajesh! Come here, your father-in-law is a very interesting person.
Do you really know how to play it or you are just posing.
People say that I play quite well, anyways you listen to it and decide.
Elder Brother!You and madam are being called downstairs.
It was during those days Doctor when we all studied together-his uncle , me and my wife.
Till date her smile is worth million but during those days everybody was crazy after her single glance.
How will you welcome us in the marriage if you will feed us this much here itself.
You will come to know about the kind of welcome we offer when you will come at our place, you will come right?
We will definitely come and there will be fireworks all around when we come.
Brother! If You will do my work done then I will ask I mother who is your aunt to get you a beautiful bride.
Brother-in-law will sit there mummy, this seat is for his brothers and friends.
Let them know what sort of welcome do we offer?
Bhola Prasad jee is researching on Kalidas ` s Shakuntala , by the way he is also searching for his Shakuntala.
Sister, people from the groom ` s side have hidden the groom ` s shoes in a red-yellow sweets box.
Hats off to you brother you have chosen such place to hide the shoes that nobody can even guess.
Hey Lord! Hey Krishna! You are known for your miracles, you play unique and wacky games.
Lord! Do some miracle that we win the game and they become fools.
Lalloo! I think he wants to take us somewhere , perhaps he knows where the shoes are kept.
Lalloo! Lets do one thing, hide this box at the place of that box and listen, hide it at such a place where they find it difficult to search.
Girls, listen to me, Let us fix the deal at five hundred bucks.
We will take exactly one thousand and one bucks then only we will return the shoes.
Hey dear! You are too much, you are having papayas sitting there instead of helping us, say something.
Mama jee, you fix the deal first, I will speak at the end.
Nisha jee! Please forgive me if I have misbehaved with you during the marriage.
You come here, where are you going, you only have fixed this marriage,did the Professor give a lot of money?
Actually mamaji , when we weighed Bhauji with all these things , they were much less than the weight of our Bhauji, we left all those things and came.
No , master! You gave me such respect , brought me such a nice Bhauji , I am happy and content.
You say that Puja resembles your sister-in-law, assume she is standing in front of you and giving you this.
Look, a sister-in-law is very close to her brother-in-law so make sure she doesn ` t miss her maternal house much.
Chameli make him understand something , with great difficulty because of the holiday I have convinced Bhaiya today to play cricket.
Hey Prem! You are not allowed to just watch at cricket field, you also have to play.
Everybody ` s attention is towards our new player who has clean bowled the expert player at the very first bowl.
Our new player is turning towards batting , the match has now taken an interesting turn.
Our new player is standing at his crease with full confidence.
I have talked to the cook , instructed him that it is Bahu ` s baby shower function , all the works should finish in time.
It ` s great Bahu! You have made Lalloo an Englishman by teaching him English.
Bahu!Just ask when are the people from our laws coming for the function?
Actually her college exams are beginning this month after being postponed for long.
Oh!What kind of a girl is she? Get up Nisha, Prem will be coming soon.
Wait? I haven ` t waited.
So were you counting stars in the morning standing at the roof?
People say that beautiful girls look even more beautiful when they tell lies.
Shall I ask one thing , why have I got these flowers today?
Basically Nisha Jee, whenever we have met we have always fought,nothing could be better than flowers to increase the recognizance.
Alright tell me this that why did you ask for pardon while leaving after the marriage?
You will laugh if I tell you the truth.
Sometimes we are wrong in recognizing people.
You are not like that how I had thought about you in the first meeting.
What ` s the matter Tuffy! First flowers and then chocolates, is it a special day today?
For the first time today a girl is sitting at the front seat of my car.
People say that this day definitely comes in everybody ` s life, today this special day has come into my life Nisha jee.
I am sharing my secrets with you and you are sitting with comics.
Reading and writing is not allowed while travelling one should rather sing and play.
Anyways since when I have heard you singing at the roof I have become your fan.
Tuffy! Right before the third comic opens, I guess I have to put an impression.
Mummy has sent a letter for you , take it.
Respected Samdhi Jee , hope you all will be alright.
I am very delighted to meet Prem today,now you also must send Rajesh Babu here.
Professor Sahab also wants to say something, take it.
Friend Kailashnath, I have heard that you have started wearing dhoti these days.
Every morning and evening you hear Ramayana from your daughter-in-law, we have not grown such old dear.
I am sending a new suit piece for you.
On the joyous occasion of the baby ` s birth both his grandfather (maternal/paternal) will dance wearing similar clothes.
Hey elder brother come, all the guests have come, Bhola jee has also come.
He is here since noon , I have become very close to your brother-in-law.
You are looking very nice today, brother please come with us upstairs.
Whatever you say, whatever you do, I just like everything.
Kaka, look at this just now we have got a fax from foreign that the collaborators there have appreciated our scheme a lot.
Bhai Sahab! Is this scheme for the same factory which you are launching for Prem?
Puja!They have called me there for some final discussion.
Bhaiya! Bhabhi ` s delivery might be anytime.
She needs you the most now and because of me you have to leave her alone in such a situation.
He is saying that the delivery could be anytime and I have to go abroad because of him.
Prem! Along with Kaka Jee we all have dreamt together for you that you prosper a lot and earn good name.
Your brother is going to make this dream a reality.
And if it is about me , I don ` t need to worry about anything when you are there with me.
For a sister-in-law there cannot be a good friend other than a brother-in-law.
Bahu!It has been long Rajesh has left , is there any news from him about his arrival?
Bhai Sahab! I spoke to him today itself, his work is about to finish.
You are too much dear, he has gone there for work and you handed him a list of nail-polishes.
Since when Rajesh has gone , he has taken over the responsibility of all the work in the office.
Nisha! Please ring Prem at the office and ask when is he coming?
I will be late , ask Bhabhi to take rest and tell Lalloo to prepare and keep my food.
You take so much time to select the vegetables, don ` t know how much time you must be taking to do your work at the office.
There is magic in your hands Nisha jee , for the first time I have had such good halwa.
You must be thinking how crazy is he, he is the fan of your singing, dancing and now cooking also.
You also have a weakness, you believe something very easily.
You are amazing Nisha jee! You stop me when I want to ask you something and poke me when I am quiet.
We were waiting for Rajesh babu ` s arrival, we will leave now.
Hey! You are amazing Professor Sahab, Your son-in-law has come yesterday and you want to leave today.
I wanted to stay for three-four months or so but its my daughter ` s in laws ` s place.
Samdhan Jee, We will not let you go today even if you get angry today.
Yes dear son Prem, till how long we will sit here? What do we need to do? Tell us.
Its a very simple game , Bhola jee will play music there and we will pass this pillow here.
Whenever the music stops , the pillow is in whoever ` s hand is caught and he will have to obey whatever he is asked to do.
I will sit there and see that nobody cheats.
You are amazing Doctor Sahab, I have a strong heart, it will not fail so soon.
Bhabhi Jee! I have a complaint , You stayed here for many days but never came to our place for dinner.
Just a minute brother , let us bid adieu properly.
Samdhan Jee this soul is so crazy , it always craves for the more.
We stopped you for one day , now we want you to stay here for one more day.
Let us click a photo with Nisha so that we remember how lovingly she stayed here with us for these days.
Are you going? There are no excuses left with which I can stop you.
As soon as the factory is inaugurated, I will talk to Bhabhi about our marriage.
Hey dear brothers, what are you looking at? Our Prem Bhaiya has become a big person today, salute him.
I was scared of just this.
Hey I know these servants very well, illness is just an excuse, it is his scheme to extract money.
Bhauji! This letter is not fake , I swear , I haven ` t paid for that.
Listen , when your Bhauji recovers tell her that you have searched Chameli for yourself.
Bahu! Lalloo left yesterday and you will leave today,who will entertain us?
Kaka Jee that is why I say , our factory ` s work has begun , bring a sister-in-law for me.
Alright Bahu! It is your responsibility from now onward to search a bride for him.
The weather has suddenly become so pleasant as the talk about your marriage began.
Kaka Jee has given me your marriage ` s responsibility , tell me , what do you prefer Love marriage or arranged marriage.
Did you see baby! Your uncle is two steps ahead of your Papa , he sneakingly searched an Aunt for you.
That means that you and your madam had already fixed this program.
Hey! If she is not coming downstairs then we will go to her.
Please eat Tuffy, the one who used to feed you will not return now.
She was ruthless , she fascinated us for few days and then left us alone.
I don ` t know what magic she had, we just forgot how to live without her.
Hey Jagan! All the doctors had refused , they had said that my Bhauji will never recover.
But, I had full faith that nothing can happen to her.
Puja Bhauji had prayed for her brother and it worked , she opened her eyes and smiled.
I told her that this miracle is because of that sister-in-law whose blessing is always there with me.
Master! Bhauji gave her life for my tears , she blessed me by giving her life in lieu of my sister-in-law.
Elder brother! Ask that god that why does he bring good people?
Lalloo! Your Puja Bhauji was the goddess of affection , she was a storehouse of mothering.
He is also hungry for love, he also wants to be loved Lalloo.
You are talking about mothering, Didn ` t the baby have the right on that?
We are missing Puja a lot after her demise, just think what must be going through poor Rajesh?
Even if he doesn ` t speak anything himself but we are ourselves observing his condition for so long.
He is tense and the reason behind his trouble is the upbringing of the baby.
Son Rajesh! You don ` t need to worry about the future of the baby.
If Rajesh had married Sweetie that time, we would not get to see this day.
Hey , You need to be familiar with your tradition to keep someone else ` s child with affection , do you understand?
Which girl would like to be a step mother these days? Which parents would give their daughter to Rajesh in such a situation?
I am sorry Bhai Sahab but I ask you , can you get your daughter Nisha married to Rajesh?
Bhai Sahab! What is the harm in the condition which sweety has put?
You have made such a fuss for a baby , what is there to think about the children dear Rajesh! They are brought up anyhow.
Shame on You, It is because of your this behavior that we are without children.
He is right , how can he hand over his dear child to a stranger without even knowing her.
Papa! Puja ` s memories are enough for me and the baby.
You need a support at every moment of life and then it is a big responsibility to up bring children.
But Papa the baby might get a mother who later makes him estranged.
Since when Nisha has come back she keeps talking about there and even the baby remains all the time with her.
Just ask Nisha once and if she agrees we will get her married too with great sputter.
Nisha! I am grateful to you for the step you have taken for the baby.
Lord! Do some miracle today, such a miracle that people in the universe develop more faith on you.
Kaka! Your pampered one who used to ask little things from me has hidden such a big matter into himself.
I ask you Nisha , if you had accepted the baby by being his Aunt , would the mothering become less.
Trust me Puja it was my fault, I could not understand what were you trying to say at the time of departure.
Kailashnath! I must have done some saintly things in my last birth, I am blessed with such a son-in-law.
Who are you? what are you doing in my house so late at night?
Lutiya Pathan has sent us.
Today was the last day to repay the debt but you did not repay, that is why I have come to remind you.
Yes , Yes You don ` t need to remind me , when I have the money I will give it back.
You had said that you will be wealthy when your daughter starts singing.
He has performed twenty five shows , but not a single drop of your seasonal rain has reached them.
Listen Shyamlal! If the money is not sent by twelve noon then remember it will be a bad weather for you.
Are you threatening me?
It is just a signature not threatening , the complete document will be written tomorrow and it will be written until your body has blood and my pen has power.
Hey! Why are you talking like this Shayamlal Jee! I am an honest person , sir,I have returned all the money of number two, yet he is asking for fifty thousand more.
Krishnamurti! I do not know all that,I am quite straightforward.
Mohini will not come for the rehearsal if fifty thousand rupees bucks are not paid.
What happened Krishnamurti! You look so upset, is everything alright?
Sir! That Shayamlal Jee is asking for fifty thousand more!
Yes, Shyamlal Jee! Fifty thousand rupees is not a big amount for a talented artist like your daughter, you can take it whenever you want.
Shayamlal Jee! Come to my house with Mohini , I will give you the money there itself.
Here are your fifty thousand bucks, hey at least count them.
Hey Saxena! All this clerical work is not done by Shyamlal.
If it is much less than that then I swear of Lord Vishwanath of Kashi , that you will have to repent , I am leaving now.
Hey Shyamlal Jee! Will you not eat anything?
Let Mohini go for the rehearsals , you sit with me , we will wet our throats.
I am coming right now.
Hey Saxena, bring me the glass, wow cheers-cheers.
Munnabhai! Police has put the raid at Badkey ` s place, yet I am saving the money , this is today ` s ransom.
These are the last days of the Month Munnabhai!That is why nobody comes to play cards.
The distance between your life and death is not more than the sharpness of Munna ` s knife.
If you ever tell a lie hereafter then your hands will not remain with you even to touch the cards.
Hurry up, Don ` t waste the time, we have to appear in the police station for attendance.
Hey Pakiya! You are still here, Is it your strike or the Railway ` s strike?
I am telling Munna Bhaiya! A new gang has appeared in our area , they are seen near the station around Hanuman street and they come in the dark and then they plunder.
Whose gang?
A man named MukutBihari,he has come from outside after murdering, he is their boss.
Do you know his address?
Nothing , I could not even see their face and Navratri ` s Dandiya is going on these days in Hanuman street , it is difficult to recognize him in the crowd.
Who among you is Mukut Bihari?
Mukut Bihari! Get your Ration Card transferred from here quietly and don ` t be visible here after morning.
A letter has come, ` Munna Bhaiya come home soon, it is a big trouble ` .
All the shops were robbed and our police force has yet not understood that who were the robbers?
Only this is known that it was the gang of a dangerous culprit named Lotiya , the police has been looking after him for long but it is not known where has he taken Mohini.
Is there any clue of the owners of the motor bikes from the bikes recovered?
Sir! All those were stolen motor bikes.
Sir , we have got a message through the wireless that an outclassed has entered our area.
Who is he?
His name is Munna.
He was outclassed from this area an year ago.
This is his file.
He is Mahesh Deshmukh, how can he be Munna?
Sir! He is known as Munna in this area , he has been sentenced for an year for murder charges.
The file says that he is a dangerous culprit , but my memory says that he was an innocent , emotional but impassioned youth who was ready to die for his motherland.
Do you know him sir?
I knew him, I was posted in Nasik two years back.
There was a bank in a deserted street in front of my police station where both his parents used to work.
I still remember the day when I had first met Mahesh.
Babu Jee! Babu Jee! I had told you that I will win the best navy cadet cup, see this.
Best navy cadet cup?
Yea Mom! Best Navy cadet cup, I have done it dad, I have done it.
Deshmukh Sahab! You have to sweeten our mouths now , your son has fulfilled your wish.
Yes my wish has been fulfilled but let Mahesh too fulfill his dreams.
What do you want to become Mahesh?
I want to be included in Navy platoon sir, I want to be an Admiral.
Alright, that ` s very good.
I don ` t know what has entered into his mind since childhood that he always wants to die for the country.
He must have been a patriot in last birth, who became a martyr for the independence of the country.
Alright Mom, I shall leave, I will meet you at home in the evening.
Look, I have been working in this bank since twenty years and it is my duty to protect their money.
I don ` t mind if I have to give my life for duty.
That lady is going inside the bank sir! And there is also a child.Their life might be in danger sir.
Do one thing go from here and if you find police on the way then send him to me.
Sir! My Parents are struck inside and I shall go from here?
Look , they have guns , they can fire anytime and your life might be in danger , do you understand?
Why is it that only the Police has the right to fight against the evils and crimes. why don ` t we have that? Why sir?
Well I had written my name for the motherland since when I wore this uniform.
Sir! It is necessary to stop that girl and the lady from going inside the bank.
The robbers can fire seeing your uniform , I will go inside and bring the lady back , sir!
Please order me sir! Please sir!
Mahesh ` s most happy day turned into a miserable day into minutes , I had never seen life cracking a bigger joke than this.
Mahesh went to Mumbai with his sister few days later , but I started feeling that my patience to bear pains has increased after that.
Anyways , search every nook and corner of the city and close all the ways to go out , it is very necessary for me to catch this man.
Because I want to know this that how did he become Munna from Mahesh?
Jyoti! Still four days are left for the year to complete. Still the coin of an outclass is imprinted on my forehead.
Police is searching me like dogs and you know until I finish my punishment, I cannot come back to Mumbai.
Tell me why have you called me?
For Mohini.
What has happened to Mohini?
The people of Lotiya Pathan took her away.
So what shall I do?
Whom can I ask other than you to rescue Mohini from Lotiya?
There are lakhs of girls in the city, I have not undertaken the pact for all of them.
But Mohini is the only girl among those lakhs of girls who helped you to save my honour.
Look Jyoti! I am an outclassed person and I don ` t want to indulge into a problem without any reason.
This is police ` s responsibility not mine.
Don ` t make me more angry saxena, you have done it all, you are the root of all the problems.
Accusing each other won ` t bring Mohini back.
So Shyamlal Jee! It is better if we release our anger and think about Mohini ` s rescue.
For sure we will get a solution.
The way has come to your door Shyamlal!
The long arms of the law cannot reach the dark corner of the world of crimes of Lotiya Pathan where your sister is captivated , only my hands can reach there.
You are so young,you cannot fight back Lotiya Pathan, they will cut and throw you in gutter.
Shyamlal! You have become so blind in your selfishness that you cannot even see your profit.
My profit , look he will make me profitable!
Look Shyamlal! If I am not able to bring your daughter back, then understand that your one thorn will be out forever.
Because you think that Lotiya and his people will not let me come back alive.
Yes, I think this brother.
If I bring Mohini back then you will get your daughter.
But what will you get by putting your life in danger?
Mahesh! You are under arrest.
But what is my fault?
If you were outclassed then you must have done some fault.
You must have been kept outside the society by the law for the benefit of the society.
This society had outclassed Lord Rama for fourteen years for its benefit, what fault did he commit sir?
But you are guilty in the eyes of the law.
Don ` t you know what could be the consequences of showing knife to a cop?
I know sir, punishment for an year or so, but I am ready for that, but it is necessary for me to go from here now.
Mahesh! Stop there, I can arrest you and shoot you when needed as per my duty.
Shoot me then.
I will not do this, because I want to know how did you become its enemy after swearing to die for the motherland?
I have forgotten my past life.
You will have to recall because my duty is not only to stop the culprits but also to stop the crimes.
If I come to know how youngsters like you turn into criminals then in the coming years I might stop a few of them to to turn into criminals.
You talk about stopping the criminals sir! Your Police System has made me a criminal.
Yes Babuji!
Sometimes it is difficult to decide whether your tea is more sweet or your voice,do you rinse your mouth with tea?
Hey Bouquet!
I am coming Seth jee.
Keep the tea leaves and sugar and listen keep their money properly, you always forget that.
Actually Seth Jee! Very few people appreciate true talent in this world.
Hey Go and get the money from him.
Seth Jee, you deduct the money from my salary.
Jyoti! Isn ` t there a girl in your class who has blue eyes and brown hair.
The girl who became the college queen last year, Nikita?
Yes, Yes. Please introduce me to her.
I will introduce you to Nikita, but you will also have to do my work.
Why do you talk like this? Tell me what is the matter? If a brother won ` t help a sister or a sister won ` t help a brother then who will help them?
She is my friend Mohini,she had some work with you.
Actually! I wanted your psychology notes.
And if you could yourself teach then...
There is no problem in teaching , actually I don ` t have the time.
He doesn ` t even look at me.
It seems he is thinking about Nikita, what shall we do now?
What are you thinking Mohini! Just jump.
If he doesn ` t comes then, so what people in love create history, Jump mohini! Jump!
You come here to practice swimming or to drown yourself , if you again jump then you will practice drowning.
Stand straight, You are standing in just two feet water, when did you come?
I came just now.
I teach swimming here.
How many have you drowned?
Approximately thirty-forty people.
How did you come here?
I did not swim for quite a number of days, I came to know that you teach here swimming, thought of starting swimming again.
Why not, Why not.
Can you teach me diving?
Hey, I have been rewarded in diving with three-four medals.
Did you people have lunch?
We are waiting for Brother.
Shall I also sit?
Come on sit, We won ` t be able to gulp the food unless you sit.
I thought if Munna was here...
Feed each other when Munna comes here, you both will be content.
Had I known earlier that nonsense girls like you come here to study , I would have never come here.
Munna! I am going.
Are you leaving the college?
No, I am leaving this city.
You will leave the city for the nonsense of a girl.
After being insulted like this, I cannot show my face to anybody.
Nikita! How shall I explain, there is no need to take all this seriously.
It is even more serious than what you consider it to be, I am going.
Nikita! When will you meet me again?
Not even coincidentally?
Not even coincidentally.
Has Nikita left?
I wanted to apologize , I can ` t even imagine what rubbish I told her the last day.
What have I done Munna?
Even I did not know what I was speaking but I understood that I have started loving you.
Yes Munna!
I love you and I can do anything to get you.
I cannot believe Mohini that anyone can love me so much and that too a girl like you after whom any boy of the college could kill themselves.
Your smile is enough for me.
Mohini! I cannot believe that I being so away from love will get love.
So Munna! Will you marry me?
Yes Mohini.
Hello, Hello Mohini Jee! I wanted to tell you that Munna is making you a fool.
You are being used just to win a bet of hundred rupees, your emotions are being played with.
What kind of a joke is this?
If you don ` t trust your well wisher then you can see this with your own eyes in the evening at golden gate.
Mohini! We will have to lessen this everyday meeting now.
Hey, exams are near.
You want to be a navy officer?
Yes, My father had this dream.
Mohini! Job is not bread for me, it is a way to connect to the country and its system.
