This fact is undisputed that best place of human being in the universe is because of its knowledge power .
Scholars have divided knowledgeable material mainly in two parts: first natural and second artificial .
Here they have used terms ` natural ` and ` artificial ` in very broad meaning .
Things, taken in the natural section are those human does not have role in making of them and the things he himself makes are in artificial section .
Scholars have divided artificial section in two main sub-sections- first science and another art .
Our eastern scholars have made 64 sections of art, but broadly it has two sections only .
One is such art which has nil usage and second fine art, which make human heart joyful by its beauty .
In real fine arts does not have neutral area .
By watch or listen to it feelings emerge in the human heart and he gets joy because of production of the Rasa .
The thing to keep in mind is that there are only two ways of production of joy of fine art- eyes and ears .
Among the all five senses of human eyes and ears- these two senses come in least direct interaction with lifelessness .
Therefore, through these, by production of feelings and Rasa, on the extreme of this Rasa, the joy met, is compare with joy of Moksha by our ancient Indian saints .
Therefore, top place is of fine arts among arts .
Fine arts are divided into five main sub-sections- crafts, sculpture, painting, music and poetry .
Poetry is considered best among these .
It ` s publication with beauty, whether in any form, is fine art .
After looking, listening to any particular thing or think on any thing, some images emerge in mind, because reach of intellect is limited to some extend only .
Where there is no access of intellect, human take help of imagine only .
All citizens who loves fine arts know that there are two groups of fine art experts .
One consider the work of fine art is only entertainment .
Its opinion is that art for art ` s sake .
Another group says- Duty of art is to give is edify .
I have got chance to read and listen to opinion of both the kinds of art experts eastern and western, old and new .
The people who consider art as a medium to give edifice or try to prove that art is for the sake of art by writing anything, these both do injustice with the art .
Art is not a religion, through which edifice should be given step by step and its not also such thing which only provide entertainment of human, because only entertainment can be such entertainment which can culminate sadly .
But this religion is of powerfuls .
For this strong hands, great feathers and strong heart is needed .
You are a small tripping bird, as she gets a small portion of meat, by hitting beak here and there on that, she use to cry while fighting with same kind of other birds .
On this it will be said that why not, when there is joy in art, when there is most fun in art .
Meaning of art is - Controlled, restrained, dignified life .
For becoming emperor like Caesar there is need of strong soul like Caesar .
The way in which these actor make money through their physical mistakes and demerits, in the same way you make profit through your your mental and personal mistakes .
You create literature using ugliness of yourself and people .
You made heart of nation dead by your precepts .
But, your writers who are considered most honest are so coward that they give excuse of not visible even after opening of cover from their eyes .
Some will say that the thing has more originality, should be considered great .
Someone can also say this that better is that by whom we get most entertainment and some can also think that the best art is that which give best education .
Artist who makes this kind of arts make any plan before making of its content or starts work without any planning .
Or after making of the planing, as it ` s work grow further, change use to take place in the planning .
We meet three kinds of artists, but mostly creation of third kind of artist use to be best .
Fact is that even earlier planning of their content by artist, realisation of difference do not occurs at the time of creation .
Their work do not let them closed into their own made plan and they go in the direction, their work want them to go without any information .
Even though, this should be considered that in making of any great artistic work if there is no complete planning, but decision of its main goal is done in advance .
Now the question emerges here that decision of greatness of this aim made by which test .
When even now it is not decided that what is aim of human life and where and how personal and community life of human being is going, how the decision of greatness of aim of artistic creation will be done?
If some time primary goal of human life is being devotion, than some time most attacks were done on the existence of the god .
If in a particular period effort of betterment of community life is considered top aim of human life, in other particular time only betterment of personal life .
That ` s why art is called image of human society and in the creation of every artist we necessarily found some particular kind of image of society of his time .
In my view beyond time, space and character biggest research lying in great sentence ` Sarvam Khalvidam Brahm ` of Vedanta among the all research done in the world till this time .0000000
` All are Bhrahma ` human can not reveal truth larger than this .
All universe is only one element, this is the greatest invention of the scientist .
Till the time this Panchbhutmay body is existed, then human can not live without working even for a moment .
After this experience human being will do only those works, which are beneficial to all .
And, further when he will do this work without any benefit, then sadness will not be there for him and he will always enjoy the joy .
Thus, foundation of fine art will be Idealism only, but despite being stayed on the foundation of idealism outer form of this art necessarily should be realist .
Thing is that till the time idealism is not covered by realism, it is not remain a thing of reach of human being and becomes unreal .
Because of boredom of this kind of idealism west have gone to realism .
From the time of world famous play writers Shakespeare and Moliere of England and France realisation of writing started there and in the time of novelist Dickens and Theckre this realism reached on its top .
World famous play writer of Norve Ibson has produced Naturalism by changing in this realist style, in which however streams idealism use to be there, but its outer form look like realistic .
Following Ibsan all famous western writer have usually followed this trend .
Strindberg of Sweden, Tolstoy of Russia, Roma Rola of France, Tomas mann of Germany and Burnad Shaw of England etc. all were and are writer of this trend .
The way in which poetry has top place among fine arts, in same way visual poem has in poetry .
The scenes shown in the play, gave pleasure of seeing crafts, sculpture and painting and from dance, singing and dialogue of music and poems .
In India the first book on Natyashashtra is of Bharat Muni .
Though names two Acharyas Shilalind and Krishanshav of natyashashtra found in the Vyakaran of Panini but any book by them is not available .
There are two kinds of things- Mukhya and Prasangik .
Beej and Karya are two limitations of the content .
Beej is starting of the story and Karya is the result .
There are three steps between starting and result- Bindu, Pataka and Prakari .
Seed of Beej is visible in Bindu and Bindu is remain till the last time in order to maintain order of play; Pataka and Prakari are big and small stories in the main story .
In the context of Hero Bharat Muni says that hero should be one kind among these four ` Dheerodatt, Dheerodvat, Dheer-Lalit and Dheer-Prashant ` .
Then, Vrities means method of working is described .
These Vrities are considered of four kinds- ` Bharati ` , ` Kaushiki ` , ` Satvati ` and ` Aarbhati ` .
Each Vriti has four parts and that parts has many sub-parts .
This complete work character of do through ` Angik means acting, Vachik means dialogue and Satvik means humour, weeping etc .
All know that Indian scholars have considered 9 Rasas, which born by mixer of 9 Sthayi Bhavas, 33 Sanchari or Vyabhichari Bhavas and Vibhavas and Anubhav .
Bharat Muni has considered joy of this consumption of literature as equal to god .
Rumination of book of Bharat Muni is even today necessary of theater persons .
Now unintended material oriented literature is absolutely disliked in visual literature like drama to civilised groups .
Therefore natural creation is only appreciated by people of this period .
Now by taking help of supernatural subject infliction of visual art is not correct .
The first written book on drama is by famous western philosopher Aristotle .
Name of this book is Poetics .
We only guess about the age of Bharat Muni and scholars says that book of Bharat Muni on Natyashashtra is oldest in the world .
Aristotle has divided drama into two parts- tragedy and comedy .
Nowadays tragedy means sad ending and comedy means happy ending .
But in old Greece these does not have such large meaning .
Sad ending dramas necessarily did not have place in old Indian drama art .
But the emotion or Rasa emerges in Greek tragedy is completely available in ancient drama-art .
Drama is not of human being, but imitation of his life .
Last aim of life is its special kind of imitation, not its merit .
Human life makes of its merits, but human ` s happy-sorrow depends on its imitation .
Therefore drama do not follow creation for following character but imitation of character comes under the imitation of creation .
Leader of Bharat Muni is more or less similar to leader of Aristotle .
In this way we see that in the initial phase of drama, their is no specific differences in proposed factors between main civilised country of east India and main civilised country of west Greece .
Yes, knowledge of Greek method is also necessary for theater persons as well as Indian method .
After Bharat Muni and Aristotle period of rule came in both directions .
Result of this came that for many centuries plays were being written in both direction, as machine made things .
After world famous play writer of Norve Ibson again changes came in the method of play writing .
At first some idea is needed in a play .
Meaning of idea here is not a simple idea, but some problem of life .
After emergence of idea conflict is necessary for development of that idea .
Both outer and inner types of conflict is necessary .
Outer conflict could be of one person ` s with other or one person ` s with society or nation or males with female .
Inner conflict is a conflict of heart of a person only .
In play, here, psychology finds place for it ` s work .
Plot is created for affiliation of this idea and conflict and entertainment .
All plays of ancient period used to be written on religious or historical themes .
Any incarnated male or king used to be its hero .
In modern age social plays are more written in comparison to religious and historical .
Without this stablishment of unity is becomes very tough, so more attention towards this is necessary .
Incarnated man of ancient age and king himself used to be representative of the contemporary society .
This was the reason of it ` s importance .
This is done in the Wilde Duck and Lady from the Sea plays by Ibson .
Due to this correlation or similarity significant help is met in establishing uniformity in the play .
The way in every existence get started, developed and ended in the universe, similarly drama also .
Where should play begin and after development where should it end, much attention should be given on this .
Beginning, development and ending of the drama could not be similar to novel or story .
Both things are not possible in the drama .
Again drama is a thing of performance, therefore there is no space of leniency of a moment .
So, beginning of drama from conflict is best .
Needless to write this that production of the Rasa is cause by emergence of Sthayi Bhava with Vibhava, Anubhava and Sanchari Bhava .
Fear is remain there of Rasa-Bhang even due to a small carelessness .
Without supremacy of feeling no one thing of literature become of permanent importance .
Skilled theater person only can do appropriate mixture of both things .
Only thinking of problem related to life, knowledge of psychology, experience of world and excellence of writer are main tools of drama creation .
Due to performance of drama most naturality is most needed in these .
West has made great progress in this context .
This is written earlier that beginning of naturalism in the west was happened by world famous play writer of Norvey Ibson .
To bring naturality Ibson have done two main things in the dramas written earlier .
First is that he completely boycotted both Ashravya and Niyat Shravya kind of self-dialogue from drama .
But the character standing nearby him is considered so dumb that he can not listen .
More unnatural thing than self-dialogue could not be in drama .
In which second kind of aside is completely unnatural .
Similarly a long self-dialogue can be while monologue in sadness .
We found this kind of self-dialogue in the plays by Ibson himself and his followers .
Where self-dialogue is natural- its various examples are also found in western dramas .
But, no one thing in the world has reached at totality and will not reached .
Natya Kala is more developed after Kalidasa and Shakespeare .
Western play writers has invented many ways to remove self-speeches .
Work of self-dialogue can be done by using any tool among these .
The second fact Ibson has told in order of bring naturality in the drama, that is boycott of verse, poem and dance from drama .
All modern play writers of west have also followed Ibson .
At here dramas are full of verse, poems and dance, even character orates same theme in the poem while narrating the same in the prose .
This should be stopped in the drama .
Many people in word love songs, so some characters of the play can sing .
This is extreme of unnaturality; because such things never happened in conversation; so it ` s usage is necessary to be ended .
For the defense of naturality of drama, one another thing is propagated in Europe that is speech of character should not be long .
But Ibson and some of his followers has proven by their writing that this is not necessary for naturality .
On many places bringing of long speech becomes necessary for naturality .
Now the custom of keeping only three parts is prevalent in Hindi-drama and then efforts are made to keep each part equal .
This is also a such fact, by which many plays seem very unnatural .
Number of parts, order and smallness-longness of them is depended on Kathanaka .
If parts will be more, then they should should be kept small .
Due to more parts, no other difficulty is there then more times changing scenes .
Keeping many characters, this makes our plays more unnatural .
As the helper of main characters we can keep su-character such as city residents etc .
He should also keep in mind that no matter how realistic he is, no complete realism is achievable in play .
Any drama should not be of more than of 18000 words .
Controversies of politics and religion should not be in that .
Violation of these golden rules will lead audiences to bad theaters .
A woman of bad character must be there in the play .
We should not go theater in the way we go to any shop, but we should go in a way we go for having food .
The thing we need and we eat eat with joy and emotional sense .
Hasya Rasa is a necessary merit of the drama, but it should not be kept in all drama .
But, here it should not be considered that Hasya Rasa could not be kept in tragedy dramas .
It can also be placed successfully in many tragedy plays .
The words or sentences produced this Hasya, they are called Vyang at our place .
Western litterateur has divided this Vyangya in three main sections- Satire, wit and humour .
All of three can be beautifully used in Hasya-Rasa .
The kind of performance of Hasya-Rasa on Parasi Rangmanch, is of very lower grade and obscene .
Both of writing and performance of Hasya-Rasa are very hard work .
For this extra-ordinary excellent writer and actor is needed .
Many characters of ancient Sanskrit plays used to speak in Prakrit language .
Today few characters of the English drama use to speak in sub-language .
In the ` Page Miliyan ` play of Burnad Shaw a flower seller girl speaks sub-language .
Similarly, some characters of his ` Press Cutting ` and other plays also speak in sub-language .
Therefore, if such kind of words are used in the language of some characters, naturality of dialogues will be increased .
The people from Bengali, Maharashtra, Sikh, Gujarati societies speaks the Hindi in what way, if the same kind of Hindi is spoken in theater, naturality of the drama will be increased .
But, Urdu language should be such, that could be easily understood by Hindi audience .
If in mutual conversation between Muslims and Hindus Hindus should speak Urdu, then why not Muslims should speak Hindi ?
When mutual dialogue between Muslims and Hindus happpens, then Hindu mostly use Hindi words and Muslims Urdu words .
For writing such play play writer should keep in mind theatrical methods along with writing methods .
In theatrical things, writers should give special attention to the scene arrangement, dress of characters and entry, exit of the character .
There used to be one scene in, one issue in ancient Sanskrit play .
Yes, additional used to happened of the issue Vishkambhak, Praveshak, Chulika, Akasya and Ankavatar .
But these scenes used to come in the starting or ending of any part, not in between .
Main reason of this is that there was no this kind of curtain system in theater that time .
Even today trend is become popular of keeping one scene in one part in western plays .
It has three reasons- one by keeping one scene in a complete section, the big attraction of scene changing, this does not remain in play .
Second, many times entry, exit and dialogue of some such characters happen in a single scene, which should not be .
Third, due to keeping one scene only, a huge amount of difficulties has to face in aggregating time .
There can not be any rule about keeping number of scenes, because it depends on dialogue etc. of the play .
But if any part has much more scenes, then they should be kept small .
Apart from this, their system should be such that there will not be any problem in their changing .
Fort, palace, hall, drawing room, mess, garden etc are shown in such kind of scenes .
Scene painted on cloths, which can lift and cover or parted by spiting .
In both sides, side curtains and management of top curtain is necessary in all three kind of scenes .
In narrow place of theater, management of more then two earlier kind of scene can not be kept together .
Theater person should also keep attention towards entry and exit of the characters .
Critics of western drama has stress in this regard .
It has two reasons, first, it can not completely addressed in drama .
Second, sudden entry and exit is completely removed from the play, then aesthetic of the play will be reduced .
However Ramayana by Goswami Tulsidas is not a visual literature, though several instances of this can be called dramatic .
Sudden entry of Janak-doot, not only increased beauty but immediately solve the problem of giving answer by Ram .
Western writers have increased naturality of dialogues by allowing food etc. on stage .
The relation play writer has with theater, similar has with scenes of play, its characters, nature of characters, acting, body and dress .
These all thing should be according to country, time and character .
Play writers of west always keep this in mind and and they describe this things completely in their plays .
This thing can also be said in the context of historical plays .
How much necessary part is acting of play, needless to write .
The plays converted into films, acting is all things in them .
Most responsibility of acting lies on ability of the actors, no doubt in this .
Famous play writer of England Golsvordy and Famous play writers of Germany Hoptman has done this work effectively in their plays .
Few scenes of some of their plays are full of silent acting .
In this context, third scene of third part of Golsvordy ` s play Justice is able to read with attention for play writers .
In the age of cinema, special verbal cinema attention of the common people is now less on plays .
These both things, if much more similar to each other in some case, then in another cases very much different .
The kind of scenes and events can be shown in cinema, similar is not possible in plays even after very good theater .
Similarly, the presentation of any great theme through dialogue can happen in play, same is not in cinema .
And , the impact register of direct dialogues and acting of character and dialogue and acting of visuals on mind , obvious differences are there .
Same thing will also be applicable for verbal visuals .
One more thing- somewhere a good mixer of play and cinema can be possible .
For example, scenes of war, fair etc are shown by cinema in plays, then they will look more natural and will impress mind much more .
Army of war and fighting, gathering and movement of election, fair etc can not be shown in theater in such way, as in cinema .
Management of showing these scenes by films necessarily can be succeeded .
Kala Bhavana of Shantiniketan, where she got educated, nowadays she is head of Mutikala department .
Like Kandisky and Mrax Kly his form orientation is much more introvert .
Ramkinkar has taken help of cubism in the painting ` Maan-Beta ` and ` Krishna Janm ` etc .
But where he presented painting of labourer and farmers, there live realism is visible in his creation .
Beautiful expression of human beings exploited is done in ` Santhal Parivar ` and ` Fasal ke bad dophar ki vishranti ` .
His skill of realism passes test and he painted common people in very healthy way .
He has natural affiliation towards statue making and he learned it from his effort .
Ramkinkar is completely original in content and form and in the search of originality he use to make and destroy several shapes of sand .
What is the price of any thing, what is base- he never taken care of it .
When he prepared portrait of Tagore, then Tagore himself told him- Ramkinkar, now don ` t look back, go ahead .
He makes effort in search of newness outside of narrow circle of prevalent trend of any art .
He hates defined line of art .
Kiran Sinha has move forward art-tradition of Shantiniketan in her own way .
From than, she is interested in niceties of painting and its deep analysis .
He has deep interest towards folk art, credit goes to her mother, who herself was a skilled folk painter .
Government of India has presented her some of painting to government of Russia, Indonesia and Yugoslavia as gift .
While connecting with the soul of people and touching higher place art discovers touching facts of life .
This ordinarily is the extra-ordinarily of Kiran Sinha .
Human feelings is spread all over in her works .
Is use is only for argumentative artist having intellectual imagination .
This is a part of her life .
Most of them are beautiful and of healthy face .
Sun shines on him there also and I make his paintings with joyousness .
Kiran Sinha has painted untouched images of Rajasthani and Santhal life .
They achieved skill of showing subtle by emerging colour soil and many mixers in Rajasthan .
He has tried to developed ` Binduvad ` style of french art stream in indigenous style .
He has done many experiment with mixer of soil and oil apart from Tempara .
Patronage of variety in colours and maturity is given, along with area of his own expression is made vast .
His creation will last over all upcoming ages because universal power lies in his art .
Both have eased the path of art by strong steps and mutual cooperation on the journey of hard work .
By becoming inspiration an cooperator of each other, by making ` bulbul studio ` near Shanti Niketan, even today this artist couple is continuously busy in art .
For a long period of time art ideals presented by Bengal school and later Shantiniketan style use to being carry forwarded .
Along with, who added this with the elements of folk culture of our country .
All erstwhile banned were proven wrong and the logic of supremacy of imagination considered higher .
As a result, personal art forms were presented in independent form in the context of arts of ` Calcutta Group ` .
Probably as a result of this pressure new artists emerged with a new challenge in the field of art .
Therefore, they should move forward while developing autonomous values and personal art interests with thrilling genre .
Ratin Mitra has first looked upon the possibility of this new form of the art .
Due to inspirational power of mind, concious alertness and natural curiousity of establishing a new sect was in them .
Mitra has also looked upon problems of the age and changed angles .
As a result impact of revolutionary theories of dialectical materialism marked on his art .
Apart from this , existing acceptance of realism has provided complete believe and capacity of carrying duties in this .
Innumerable paintings of Mitra praised in London, Kabul and Australia, but now he is busy in strange experiments .
Unprecedented expression of feeling is done in those by a little bit labour .
The prominent feature of his drawing is relevance of incorporation of natural .
Only with the help of structure of line not only he learned filling coulours but directly adopted coulours by entering in scene .
It seems, his arbitrary lines speaks .
He painted animal and birds in lines not by imaginative world of formal process of, but by naturality of the heart .
In other words, its meaning is a symbol of philosophy of life of the artist, history of his interpersonal voices rests in them .
Images of animal are painted with a strange vitality and true activeness .
The blessing pioneer of the art Avanindra Nath Thakur gave to him, is now proving itself true .
Knowing this I am very happy that he has made many sketches after tour .
Gopal Gosh is master in brush-drawing, but sketching is extra-ordinary .
Joy or sad, light feeling or deep feeling, spontaneous awakens or extra-ordinary deep meditation all are subject of his sketches .
Impact of tradition of rural art of Bengal is also in his images .
He has made view of rural feeling, interest, culture and values in several landscape paintings .
Makhan Dutt Gupta is also product of Calcutta Art School, but his interest is more towards commercial art .
After being a teacher for a while in Birbhum and Kaumila of Bengal, he have been working in a advertisement agency .
Makhan Dutta Gupta has underlined importance of subjected aesthetics, but understood its inclusive approach broadly .
His sense of meaning is fan of newness along with old arts ideals .
Strange art is produced by abiding its boundaries, but who came out of mind, will always fly in the air .
Even though, his original inspiration and researcher nature sidelined orthodox methods .
His human sensitivity and expansion of view is affiliated with expansion of life .
Sen is a brilliant artist of Calcutta Group .
He has been receiving art education from Madras Art School in the supervision of famous artist Devi Prasad Chaudhury .
Exhibition of his painting is organised in Calcutta, Lahore, Bombay, Delhi, Brussels and Paris .
Sen was born in a middle class family .
He didn ` t get such facility or environment from the beginning, which encourage him towards artwork securely .
Untimely death of the father snatched away even the available base .
Responsibility of nurturing complete family came on him .
In 1947, Sen departed England on government scholarship for getting higher education of art .
Kalyan Sen clearly adopted two art methods, which seems different and dissociated .
He was taught in Indian Society of Oriental Art and Norman Blount Memorial Medal of the society was given to him .
He participated in various art exhibition of India .
He is impress by Brock, but didnt have such psychological insight or deep sense .
Kalyan Sen initially studied in Patna University .
But later he admitted in Government School of Arts and Crafts of Kolkata where he gave introduction of his art-skill under the guidance of principal Shri Ramendranath Chakravarti .
Later he earned popularity by making images of several stories .
In normal water proof ink, tempera and poster colour he paid attention of very small details by his personal special method .
Sen has taken more interest in rural subjects, but as a commercial artist he got enough success .
In adopting commercial art usually art is suppressed by sense of promotion, means promotion becomes main and art subsidiary .
Sunil Madhav Sen is also an elected member of Kolkata group .
First he wanted to become lawyer and for this he passed law in 1937, but gradually he took interest towards painting .
In 1950 first time exhibition of his painting happened, after that he took participation in many art-exhibition organised in India .
He is also of modern approach like other co-artists .
He is also member of Kolkata group and doing new experiments in art since 1932 .
Earlier he used to work as a main artist in commercial art institute, currently trainer in Indian Art School, Kolkata .
He is doing new experiments while looking at this goal .
Exhibitions of his paintings are done in many cities of the country .
He is skilled as a smart painter of mixed colours .
By internalizing various foreign impact he also stablished his excellent self in the field of art .
Three years later he exhibited his paintings in Barbizon gallery .
Since 1950 he resides in London and has presented his painting skill and new experiments in various exhibitions .
Majumdara is neither blind follower of western art nor fundamentalist traditionalist who cling to customs .
Becoming modern is necessary, but modernisation does not necessarily means westernisation .
Putting art in any fix structure of modernisation will not be good .
So, modern artist needs to be more conscious, his creation should be sharp and touching .
By looking his ` Swarg ` painting Prof. A. L. Basham had said that such a beuatiful painting is not made in India in last hundred year .
He had participated in many art-exhibitions organised in India and foreign .
His education was done in Cotton College and Edmund College of Assam .
He exhibited his paintings in Kolkata and participated in innumerable group exhibitions all over India .
He got diploma from government college of arts and crafts, Kolkata .
He was selected as a nominated member of Kala Shiksha Sangoshthi of Lalit Kala Academy inn 1956 .
He was invited for making a big wall painting ` Shakti ka Sthanantaran ` in Rashtrapati Bhavan situated in New Delhi .
He traveled all over India .
Inspired by exhibition bureau a mobile art exhibition organised in United Kingdom .
His many paintings are preserved in some important art museums of India and foreign .
Indra Duggar is also a popular artist of Kolkata and engaged independently in practice of art .
He was given duty of decoration of pandals of Congress meetings of Ramgarh and Amritsar .
