There has been a lack of adequate amount of people and wealth in the country for sorghum reform program.
In the beginning there was only an economic botanist whose work comprised of looking after crops and carrying reform work or doing them himself.
Despite these difficulties a lot of work has been carried in the field of sapling genetics.
A lot of work was also done on breeding and species reform.
Because of this several good species were formed.
Some of the major ones are- Coimbatore series, J 75, N. series, M-35-1, M 47-3, T-1, T-6 and T-121.
Several improved varieties were also developed from Akola, Maharashtra.
Selection played a major role while making these varieties.
The selection was made taking local sapling ingredients and the use of external improved varieties was almost negligible before 1958.
The varieties produced as a result of these efforts had an amazing ability to adapt according to the local conditions and the conditioning was more for specific places.
These varieties had the tolerance for local diseases, insects and weeds but the level of their production generally remained low that is there was no significant reform in the production capability.
Its major reason was less fertility of land along with the hidden producing ability of developed variety.
Now the local varieties are being tested in entirely changed conditions and situations.
The indigenous varieties were not developed keeping the present situation in mind which means the producing capability of these varieties is even less than their ancestors and therefore they should be reformed in a new way for good and fertile land so that success is achieved in the efforts of hybridization.
Even sorghum and other cereals have not remained untouched with this great change in the field of agriculture.
The work of Indian agricultural research council is extremely commendable in this direction.
The council behaved in a foresighted way and also initiated the programs of the all India research projects and in 1958 pillars were laid for regional experiments for sorghum reform.
The first hybrid variety if sorghum was prepared in a very short span of three years.
This variety was C.S.H. -11.
It has also been found that C.S. H-1 is best for drought affected areas.
The reality is that this hybrid variety of sorghum is very good and it can be grown in all dry and irrigated areas.
sorghum is not an ideal cereal on the basis of nutritional values.
It contains more of an amino acid named lucin which is harmful for health.
That is why there is fury of a disease named Pellagra in the areas where sorghum is consumed.
Research work is in progress on sorghum with endosperm in Nigeria and the amount of carotene in them is much more than other varieties.
Hence it is expected that it is not impossible to increase the amount of vitamin A in sorghum grains.
Along with increasing the production of sorghum and improving its nutritional values, efforts are also on for developing hybrid varieties with defense mechanism against diseases.
The work of developing modern anti breeding methods towards insects has been extremely exciting.
Generally the foreign sapling ingredients used for breeding is found susceptible towards hybrid and improved varieties.
Hence Jotwani and Satyo(1970) has chosen such species collected from all over the world which are either not affected by shoot fly i.e etherigona sokkta fly or its is almost negligible.
Majority of the varieties have been chosen amongst the varieties grown in Rabi season but the productivity of these varieties is less hence efforts are being made for having desirable increase in their productive capabilities.
In the beginning millet reform work was based on selection method keeping productive capability in mind.
In this method selection was made on the basis of a single plant or multiple plants.
In 1962 Krishnaswami expressed his proposal as `` foreign varieties brought from Africa and Indian varieties were used for this research work i.e. mass selection but the success of these methods was extremely limited hence it did not have spectacular impact.
Further it was also observed that the results had a lot of disparities because millet is naturally fertilized.
Several methods of hybridization were tested because this process is extremely simple in millet.
Several methods were tested for hybridization but it could not become possible to achieve any describable success.
It was possible to make the seeds of these hybrid varieties in small amount hence they could not be made popular.
Kadam(1937 and 1938) and Pandiya and friends(1955)studied the values directly affecting the production capability of millet.
The major purpose of this work was to select varieties for drought affected areas.
But it has been observed that there is no direct relationship between production and plant pubescence.
On the basis of experiments Rangaswami, Aruyangar and friends(1936) said that there is direct relationship between the number of corns per plant and production.
Further there is direct relationship between the production of major corn and its length, diameter and total area,thickness of flower stalk and height of major axis.
Krishnaswami(1961) says that by choosing a single plant several varieties giving more production have been developed.
Number 54, 37 and 59 were special in Maharashtra.
Number 54 was the variety which matured quickly.
Apart from hybridization millet improvement program is consistently being undertaken through selection method by all India sorghum improvement project.
Indian scientists knew about the hetero-sis in millet for the past 40 years.
With these researches it was proved that the miracle of breeding could only be done using total work hybridization method but the major problem was of preparing hybrid seeds at large scale.
In America, Bertan(1958) explored cell fluidity male impotence and recommended such two varieties.
They are 23 A and 18 A.
With the discovery of female varieties hybridization work got considerable momentum.
Here the production of 5 percent best quality of hybrid varieties were 103-131 percent more than the production of local varieties.
But a major problem in this work was that it was not possible to totally collect the fertilizing power of any pollinator in the first phase.
Several tests and hybridization were carried to find a solution for this problem and the testing work was carried during winter 1963-64 and spring 1964.
The test of hybrid varieties found in Kharif 1964 was carried in major millet regions at around 27 places and their production and other qualities were compared.
These experiments revealed that the production of hybrid varieties was 75-88 percent more than the local varieties.
Further the production of dry fodder was also found to be around 9 percent.
The best quality hybrid variety found was 23 Ax bill 3 B.
It was named hybrid millet number 1.
Thus the first millet of the country was developed in the year 1965 by Punjab agricultural University , Ludhiyana.
Rajasthan and Gujarat which have strong hold over millet were issued two hybrid varieties during 1966 and 1968 from the Jamnagar , Gujarat research centre.
The names of these varieties are as follows- 1. hybrid millet no-2, 2. hybrid smillet no-3.
The characteristic of these hybrid varieties was that they matured before hybrid millet no-1 and could resist dryness very well.
Further the grain of millet no-3 was more popular amongst the farmers because of its greater thickness and grey color as compared to hybrid variety number 1.
While approving them, it was found that they are not affected by downy mildew and ergot diseases.
But it could not be proved because in 1972 and 1973 it was observed that these species also get downy mildew disease.
Apart from hybrid no-3, hybrid millet no-4 was developed in Indian agricultural research institute, Kanpur center in 1968.
It was considered best especially for irrigated areas and actually they were even developed for those regions.
But after Kharif 1970 it was observed that hybrid millet no-4 was greatly affected by downy mildew and chempa disease.
To compensate the absence of hybrid millet no- 4 several efforts were made, consequently hybrid millet no-5 was prepared(tift 23 A x K.559).
Here research work was carried in different land and climatic conditions in order to know their productive capability and resistance power etc. against diseases but on the basis of available results they were approved for limited regions.
In order to increase the production of millet and other cereals the Indian agricultural research council, New Delhi has initiated the all India cereal reform project during fourth five year plan i.e. 1969.
The main objective of this project was to increase the production of millet and other cereal grains.
These varieties are greatly affected by downy mildew and Chempa disease.
Hence a bacteria free gene should be developed which is totally free from both the kinds of diseases.
Several researchers have done tireless and consistent efforts on this aspect at different research centers and agricultural universities but success has not been achieved yet.
Yet a male bacteria free gene like 126 D 2 was developed.
Which is less affected by these diseases.
Thus the impact of these diseases was also negligible in M.L. 22 and M.L. 23 genes.
They are being used in hybridization and it is expected that disease free hybrid varieties giving more produce will be developed in near future.
Efforts are made also at the international level to develop best variety of millet through modern breeding methods.
Mutation breeding and radiation breeding are major among them.
Extremely commendable work has been done in the form of all India cereal grain reform integrated project.
It won ` t be inappropriate to say that several best quality madua has been developed since last 25-26 years as medium long duration section and small duration Sharda(I.E. 901)and (I.E 28) were developed in the beginning.
Further white grained variety `` Hansa `` was also developed.
the different varieties of madua should essentially have favorable conditions because they are grown in different seasons in dry land or irrigated areas through various methods.
Through the efforts used for favorable series ` H.E.S.927 and Annapurna were found to be best from the point of view of general conditions.
It can be interpreted in as the varieties put in this category has sufficient conditioning power hence they give much more production in transforming environment or climate.
Through the experiments it was also found that the production of H.E.S.927, 928 and 928 was much more than the popular approved varieties of dry land areas ` H.22 ` and ` Kaveri ` .
Further it was also found that H.E.S.927 variety of series are less affected by a disease named ` blast ` .
It was an extremely significant result because due to the attack of diseases a variety like `` Annapurna `` was moved out of the list of approved species.
Today it is required that breeding and harvesting disease specialist should try to make best use of the available accumulated gene.
In this direction it is extremely significant step to develop varieties for combating diseases at international level through mutation breeding techniques.
This research work is carried with the help of international atomic power organization.
No significant work was done for improving the variety of cocoon, whatever work was done that was done in segregation.
The major reason behind this is that the area under cultivation is less and scattered.
The agricultural departments of various states have tried to make reforms in it with a view to solve this problem.
since the beginning there was complete lack of exchange of available breeding fluid and materials of co-ordinated breeding research efforts.
In the beginning the work of improving variety was done mainly through selection method but due to lack of limited diversity of breeding ingredients no remarkable progress could be done in selection work.
Apart from these reasons the mind of government and agricultural experts became less attracted towards crops like kangani.
The integrated project of Indian agricultural research council was initiated in 1969 and several significant works have been done so far under this project.
C.O. 1, 2 and 3 long term cocoon varieties were developed in Coimbatore research center.
Since it was a short term variety, it could be sown with cotton, paddy and groundnut.
11 varieties were tested at Jabalpur center and J.B.P 7 and 15 were found to be the highest yielding varieties amongst them.
The sequential description of the reform of cereals such as kodo etc is not available.
Their area is less and they are generally grown in specific regions.
Knowingly or unknowingly their reform work has been carried through selection method.
A sequential program of reforming the variety of these grains began after the all India cereal grain integrated reform project.
Sometime before the beginning of this work the available breeding fluid of the world were integrated.
The main objective of this work was to collect diverse sapling samples for other possible and available methods.
States such as Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh etc. decided to play the major role in this work.
Central agricultural ministry and Indian agricultural research council has also paid attention towards these grains.
By the experiments done on Coimbatore (Tamil Nadu) center it was found that I.P.S 175 has given the maximum production as compared to all other varieties included in the experiment.
I.P.S 175- This variety was obtained from Georgia(America).
The production of this variety was around 196 % more than local varieties(36 tonnes/hectare).
It should be considered best for crops like kodo.
I.P.S. 600- the development of this variety became possible because of the sponsorship of rock feral foundation.
C.O 2- The lifespan of this variety is long.
Like other cereals the reform work of chaina was done at few places only and it remained in scarcity.
Firstly the breeding fluids of Chaina available in the world were collected so that the benefit of modern techniques of variety reform is achieved.
The developed varieties were tested at the agricultural research centers at Tamil Nadu , Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh.
When the sequential research projects functions it seems as if more stress is required on this efforts because it is the crop of poor farmer class which has been named drought crops.
Their role can be extremely significant during severe drought conditions.
From the budget it was being expected that due to 3.6 % increase in the agricultural growth rate, along with subsidy in diesel few other concessions can be received.
But looking at the global situation the finance minister has not arranged for subsidy because proving subsidy is not a solution of the problem.
Several significant transformations have been done as a substitute to subsidy.
For example agricultural loan worth more than 1.25 million crore rupees was arranged.
Seven million crore rupees will be available for the farmers for the financial year 2013-14 for agricultural credit.
Under this the government is providing credit to the farmers at the rate of seven percent interest.
Like before, here the government will keep providing 3 % exemption in credit to the farmers who pay their debt on time.
Along with providing credit to the farmers, a provision has also been made for the farmers to use farmer credit card.
Hence with such efforts of the government, the scheme of proving credit card to cent percent farmers can also be achieved.
A successful initiative to deal with the problem of small land holding has also been undertaken.
The most important thing is that until now all the private banks did not provide agricultural debts.
Now announcements have also been made for increasing the limits of concession on interest rate of agricultural debt increasing the number of private and commercial banks.
He said that agricultural debt has the most important contribution in agricultural production.
The government has set a goal of 5.75 lakh crore rupee agricultural debt for the current financial year.
The government expects that this year also the distribution of agricultural debt would be more than the goal.
The farmers will not be trapped by the money lenders when they will get the credit from the banks.
Thus emphasis was also laid on increasing production and cultivating new species full of subtle nutritive elements through agricultural research.
The finance minister has again assured the northern and eastern states of green revolution to increase the production .
The government claims that considerable increment was done in the minimum support price of the agricultural products.
Because of this the production of food grains in the year 2012-13 would be more than 25 crore tonnes.
The allocation of budget for the agricultural sector was being taken as a challenge.
It was suspected that agriculture is ignored this time also then it will lead to higher price inflation.
Food grain production was the biggest concern.
Looking at the situation the eyes of agricultural experts were also stuck at the finance minister but the finance minister had adequate arrangements for agricultural and rural development in the budget.
It was a matter of concern also because in the FAO report by United Nations food and agricultural organization it has been said that by the year 2050 the total population of the world would reach around 9.1 billion.
Particularly in developing countries expenditure increases due to the increase in per person income.
Not only this, according to a United states survey, because of climatic changes, reduction in arable land, water crisis etc. by 2050 it is suspected that around 35 % of food grain production would reduce.
The budget is giving such hints that even the Central government has become alert to keep away these suspicions.
Through different provisions policies are being adopted to have more production with less acreage.
The government has made remarkable allocations in the schemes of rural development to reform the rural condition.
Around 3.5 thousand crore money has been allocated giving significance to agricultural research.
In order to fulfill the scarcity of wealth in agriculture the goal of agricultural loan has been set to seven lakh crore rupees.
Chidambaram has particularly looked at the development of villages and announced a 46 % growth in its budget allocation.
The average annual rate of agricultural sector in the 11th scheme was 3.6% while in the 9th and 10th scheme it was 2.5 and 2.4 % respectively.
Today India is the largest producer of milk, pulses and jute in the world.
The agricultural ministry has been allocated 27.049 crore rupees to promote agriculture.
It is 22 % more than the current revised estimation.
Due to the success of green revolution in the eastern regions of the country , continuing the help for eastern states , they have been allocated one thousand crore rupees for the year 2013-14.
While 500 crore rupees have been allocated for initiating crop diversity program.
Agricultural credit is a major strength for agricultural production.
Just as education and health are basic rights of human, likewise food security is also a basic right.
National food security bill is a significant assurance of UPA government whose approval is expected very soon.
Under this regulation , ten thousand crore rupees have been allocated separately for food subsidy.
chidambaram said that National agricultural development scheme has been prepared for collecting high investments in agriculture.
Further National food security mission is meant to fulfill the crop gap.
He has proposed to allocate 1000 billion crore to help eastern Indian states in 2013-14.
A proposal of allocating 500 crore rupees for the diversification of crops and encouraging farmers , 9954 crore rupees for national agricultural development scheme and 2250 crore rupees for food security mission has been put forward.
For the issues related to plant conservation, it has been announced to establish biological Pressure management institution in Rampur,Chattisgarh and Indian agricultural institute of biotechnology in Ranchi.
There is also a proposal to provide extra 75 crore rupees for the re-plantation and renovation of coconut orchards in Kerala for the year 2013-14.
After a successful result of renovation of a private experimental scheme, it has been decided to develop it in entire Kerala.
Agricultural credit is the major power of agricultural production , therefore the set goal of 5 , 75 , 000 crore rupees for the year 2012-13 has been proposed to increase to 7 lakh crore rupees.
The finance minister has said that relaxation of debts for crop loans will be continued.
The farmers who repay their debts on time will be provided credit at the rate of 4 percent every year.
So far this scheme is applicable for the credits given by public sector banks ,rural sector banks, and co-operative banks. Further they have also proposed to provide these benefits to the crop credits given by scheduled commercial banks of private sector.
Agriculture and animal rearing supplement each other.
All the farmers are associated with animal rearing like agriculture.
That is why finance minister P. chidambaram while presenting the 2013-14 budget said that National animal mission has been initiated in keeping in view the collection of investment and increasing the production and condition of local agricultural situation.
For this mission they have made a provision of providing 307 crore rupees.
He also said that in order to increase the availability of grains, a sub-mission will also be formed.
The finance minister has also allocated budget to the NABARD.
with this it will establish a cold storage.
By providing help to NABARD , in a way the finance minister has overtly associated this institution with agriculture.
Because these days conserving produced food products is more important than production.
That is why persistently directions are being given for proper care of cold stores.
The government is pressurized due to the increasing demand for food grains with the increasing population and procuring 4% increase in agricultural production.
Looking at the success of green revolution in eastern India, the finance minister, P. Chidambaram has arranged for one thousand crore rupees this time.
With a goal to increase the food grain production of the country, the government had initiated `` bringing green revolution in eastern India ` (BGREI)program in eastern India two years back.
This program is being run in seven states- Assam, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, Jharkhand, eastern Uttar Pradesh and chattisgarh.
After the implementation of this program in the year 2010-11, good results in the production of paddy and wheat have come up.
By green revolution we mean having speedy agricultural production through the use of high yielding hybrid and dwarf seeds in the irrigated and non irrigated regions of the country.
Green revolution has showed positive impact on Rabi, Kharif and Zaid crops.
During 60s an increase of 40-50 % in the production of wheat was registered in Haryana and Punjab.
Concrete results of bringing second green revolution have come up and in the 2011-12 kharif session in eastern India 70 lakh tonne more paddy has been produced.
BGREI program has been quite beneficial in removing the obstacles that limit the production of crop systems in eastern India.
Under this program there has been great increase in the production of paddy in Bihar and Jharkhand.
For this project, eastern region has been chosen in order to avail the benefits of its ample water resources which is essential to increase the production of food grains.
The major problem of eastern region is not the availability of water but its management.
The basis is that only when better agricultural methods are adopted, good quality of seeds, manure and fertilizers are put, it will be possible to increase the production of crop with ample store of water.
India needs to encourage its food grain production in order to feed its increasing population.
The only way to secure the food security which has become the matter of concern of every Indian is to grow adequate food grain at indigenous level.
Eastern region has the capacity to initiate new green revolution.
The success of second green revolution is certain due to the preferences given by the central and state governments to BGREI.
Adopting hybrid techniques of paddy, sequential plantation, SRI, subtle nutritive elements etc. are some successful things which have come up because of the hard work of state administration in this region.
But abundant resources have to be used for bringing stability in production.
Now there should be three major goals of green revolution before the country which includes self dependence of food, appropriate buffer stock and large scale export of food grain to foreign countries.
We should be careful that green revolution does not harm our producing resources but improves them.
As a result of new green revolution, finally the farmers should not be allowed to be poor and indebted.
For the last several decades excessive, imbalanced and improper use of resources was made in farming in order to increase the crop production.
Consequently the situation is that it has adversely affected the quality and quantity of our resources.
Further the imbalanced use of resources is consistently leading to air, water and soil pollution.
Consequently it has also adversely affected human health.
Apart from this, increasing cost of production in agriculture and the decreasing income of farmers has been a matter of concern.
The area under arable land is decreasing day by day due to increasing urbanization, industrialization and modernization.
The resources are being exploited more than their requirement in order to supply the food grain for the increasing population of the country.
If we do not pay emphasis on natural resources on time, particularly soil and water conservation then in the future we might have to face serious food problem.
The role of conservation farming is significant in this regard for increasing the fertility and production of soil.
Conservation farming is such a technique of conserving resources where along with maintaining the level of good crop production, the quality of resources is also maintained.
So that one gets rid off serious problems like climatic change, starvation and malnutrition.
Paddy and wheat occupy significant place among food grains.
Paddy-wheat crop system is quite popular in India.
This crop system is the backbone of country ` s food security.
Today farmers are facing serious problems like power crisis,special economic regions, increasing prices of agricultural items and global warming.
These problems naturally give rise to many problems.
There has been so many problems in agriculture for the last four decades.
India is heading towards the second green revolution now to reduce these problems.
Zero tillage technique has significant contribution in reducing the cost of production in wheat cultivation and conserving natural resources.
Crops are sown with a special kind of seed drill without plowing the field through this technique.
The soil at the place where the seed is to be sown is dug to the minimum level.
Here the space between the two lines remains unploughed.
The amount of essential fertilizers is put beneath the seeds at the time of sowing.
Such sowing have proved to be more successful primarily for rabi crops such as wheat, gram, mustard and flax seed.
The experiments carried at I.A.R.I research firm reveal that crops sown without plowing give 5-10 % more production.
Further, the cost incurred is less in sowing without plowing because common farmers plow the field 3-4 times before sowing. That is why the cost is reduced.
Sowing through this technique saves water also because there is no need of irrigation before sowing.
Later also 1-2 c.m/irrigation less water is used.
It has also been observed that the fury of weeds is less in un plowed farms.
While on one hand this technique saves the time, wealth and fuel which is spent in preparing the field, on the other hand it is environment friendly also.
Large scale experiments have been carried on conservation agriculture at Indian agricultural research institution
This experiment has been done primarily in paddy-wheat, maize-wheat, cotton-wheat, pigeon pea-wheat and soybean-wheat crop cycles.
Further 30-40 % irrigated water can be saved by growing paddy through direct sowing.
There are few precautions and difficulties in cultivation without plowing.
The first one is that there should be sufficient moisture in the soil while sowing so that there is good contact between the soil and seed.
Secondly one needs to be more careful while sowing whether the seed drill pipes are getting closed or not.
It is essential to put 20-25 % more seeds and fertilizers while sowing through this technique so that there is no danger of less production due to less number of plants per unit area and weeds.
The growth of plant roots can be less in some heavy lands.
That is why putting a layer of crop residues or other plant elements on soil positively affects the growth of plant roots.
The use of zero till drill saves 75-85% fuel, energy and time.
The accumulation of feleris miner i.e gulli danda weed is less.
In the situations of delay, sowing can be done on time.
While sowing through zero till drill farmer brothers should sow in more moisture as compared to the traditional method.
The stems of eastern crops should not be bigger than 20-30 c.m.
As far as possible sow the paddy in between two lines, it leads to accumulation.
a system has been prepared to sow the crops on lines through this technique.
The sowing can be done on lines as well as in drains according to the crop.
For wheat sowing can be done on 3 lines while soybean, mustard, horse gram and green gram have two lines.
This technique can also be adopted after proper plowing or without plowing the lines made for last crops.
It has been observed that while growing crop through this technique, 15-20% less seeds and manure are used because they are used for lines only.
There are less weeds on the lines during this method.
The reason is that the number of crop plants is more on lines because of which the weeds do not get the chance to grow.
Thus when sowing is done on lines ,less resources are used and the production is also 10-15 % more or equal to what is obtained when sown on plain land.
This method is quite useful for pulses and oil seeds.
We can sow wheat, peas, gram, pigeon pea, maize, soybean, green gram and black gram with this.
This method is good for regions with less water.
Zero tilling and sowing on lines have proved quite meaningful in cotton-wheat crop cycle.
This technique can be more beneficial if the remains of crops are spread on the surface like soil.
There was improvement in the crop production and pure profit through the techniques of conservation farming.
If sowing has to be done on lines after good plowing then the soil should be totally powdery.
It is significant that the soil has proper moisture in order to sow on lines, otherwise the seeds do not fix properly due to lack of moisture.
Vaporization also leads to moisture on the surface of lines.
In such situations irrigation is required after 4-5 days of sowing in a crop like wheat.
In fact the success of any technique related to resource conservation depends on the evenness of a field.
Lazer technique is a new scientific technique where the soil of the field is made totally even using a particular equipment.
The biggest benefit of growing crops on even land is of saving water or more crop production.
It is very useful for paddy crops where the amount of irrigated water is almost half.
Currently the farmers are taking a lot of interest in this technique.
This machine is popular as ` computer ` amongst the farmers.
Around 50 % part of the total water available for agriculture in the country is used in growing paddy.
In this method of producing paddy, the seed of the paddy is prepared in the field and directly sown in the field.
It saves a lot of water.
Since under this method water is not accumulated in the fields that is why there is a airy environment in the field.
Consequently nitrogen eruption is stopped through the process of nitrization.
One can get rid off all the problems mentioned above of growing paddy through aerobic method.
Hence there is an urgent need to make this technique useful in areas with less water so that our natural resources are not exploited much.
It has been found that there is more demanding use of soil, time, labor and other resources per unit area by adopting system of rice intensification for paddy cultivation.
After the plantation the soil is kept moist.
The water is not allowed to stand in the field.
Proper arrangement for water drainage is done so that soil moisture is maintained during plant growth and development.
Thus in paddy fields soil remains in aerable condition and there is minimum use of nitrogen fertilizers through the process of denitrification.
Around 30-40% irrigated water is also saved by doing paddy cultivation through S.R.I method.
Due to the lack of the quantity and quality of resources, today conservation cultivation is being adopted at extensive level in many countries of the world.
Conservation farming is being carried in the world on more than 100 million hectare land.
America, Australia, Canada, Brazil and Argentina are the major countries involved in conservation farming.
Green manure or other crops that cover the land should be adopted in crop cycle.
Except sorghum. millet and madua, the pure crops of all other cereals are generally rarely sown.
Planting various kinds of crops in various proportions along with sorghum, millet and madua is an extremely essential part of his farming.
All cereals are major crops of dry farming or regions dependent on rainfall.
The rainfall in these areas are the reason of the success or failure of crop.
Good production of of major crops can be procured when there is good rainfall if multiple crops are mixed and sown instead of only growing pure crops.
Thus the main objective of crop mixing method was to reduce the volume of bad effect of excess or low rainfall.
Hence this method is known as crop insurance as it faces the error implied and unreliable weather especially favorable rain conditions.
In the beginning farming was adopted as a means of sustaining life but later it was named livelihood.
In such kind of farming the farmer tries to grow almost all kinds of crops to sustain his family anyhow.
Hence he generally mixes and sows pulses and oil seeds with paddy crops.
The major benefit of mixed crop rotation is conserving and improving the fertility of soil.
The fertility of the land increases by growing pulses with paddy because pulses have the capacity to collect nitrogen from the atmosphere.
The paddy crops either uses the collected nitrogen in the same weather or this nitrogen combines with the fertility of the soil to raise the fertility of the soil.
Thus both main crop and consequent crop are benefited in mixed cropping.
The base square perimeter of the crops sown in mixed cropping is different because of the variety of roots, depth and variety of crops.
The fury of the density of diseases, insects and weeds reduces by growing two or three crops.
In fact sowing a variety of crops by mixing them is a successful technique of crop enemy control.
The life span of mixed crops is different that is one kind of crop quickly matures as compared to another crop and it is harvested thus the other crops get a competition free period.
Hence possibility of getting best produce from them occurs.
Mixed cropping has been an integral organ of Indian agricultural methods.
It will not be inappropriate to say that this method is as ancient as agriculture itself.
Colin(1901) writes that the tradition of mixed cropping is common in India and this method has definitely achieved success.
It is en extremely beneficial agricultural method and perhaps no other crop method has performed such significant role in conserving and building the fertility of Indian soil.
The first experiment on mixed cropping method was carried by a French scientist La Fliza.
Along with cereals, pulses ans oil seeds are grown in this method.
Inter cropping seems to be a new name among the methods of cropping.
Some scientists have also named it parallel cropping and some have given an attractive named like multi storey cropping.
whatever be the name but from the point of view of theory, all these methods are similar and the objective of all of them is to consistently increase the capacity of per unit land.
There is a big difference between mixed cropping and inter cropping in a theoretical form.
Whatever pulses or oil seeds are sown in mixed cropping.
That is planted by reducing the volume of basic plants of major crop.
When one needs to sow pulses in a specific proportion then the number of major plants decreases in the same proportion.
Hence inter cropping or the crops sown together is in a way planted at the cost of major crop.
In order to make it more clear it would be enough to say that in this method the major and other crops are sown in different proportions.
In the inter cropping or parallel cropping method there is no difference in the amount of best seeds of major crop or in the density of best plants.
Further efforts are made to increase the gross production and profit by planting one or two rows of any of the pulses or oil seeds.
Investments are made only on seeds for growing parallel crops.
Generally such crops are not provided separate water or manure.
Thus there is not much growth in the total cost incurred and the possibility of getting more profit increases.
Remember that this method can only be adopted when there is no adverse effect of the adjacently planted crop on the main crop.
Further the valuable gift of nature- sunlight can be converted into edible elements in large amounts.
The life pan of mixed and inter crops should be different so that mutual competition could be reduced.
Theoretically long term and short term crops are chosen for this method.
One of the crops grows with a fast speed and the other crop grows slowly.
Sugarcane grows slowly hence it is useful for internal cropping.
The perimeter of the depth of the active roots of crops that are to be grown should be different such as sorghum and pigeon pea.
Both the crops will use the soil moisture at different depths and thus the capacity of land water use will increase to a great extent.
It is also essential that one should be aware whether the crops chosen for inter cropping are active towards sunlight or not.
The reason is also that during this period it is essential for the plants to provide shade to each other.
If there is bad impact on the chosen crop then its production capacity decreases and the basic objective of inter cropping stops.
Soybean is one such crop that is why it is not sown with sorghum or madua.
The water requirement and ground water absorption capacity of the chosen crops should be more so that the limited water availability in dry areas could be used more and more and finally good production of crops could be achieved.
All these theories have always been used in one way or another for the inter cropping of cereals.
As it is already said the tradition of mixed cropping in extremely ancient in our country and today a little change is brought in that tradition and the method of inter cropping has been evolved.
Similarly, sorghum is a major crop in Sudan, West Africa and Nigeria also.
Inter cropping or mixed cropping series is quite old at these places also.
It can also be said that pure sorghum crop is rarely sown.
Generally it is sown with millet and bean.
There is also a tradition of sowing sorghum and groundnut together.
Semi dwarf varieties have been developed in Samaru which give more production.
These varieties were developed to substitute the fast growing varieties.
On the basis of experiments it was found that more benefit could be achieved by adopting inter cropping method.
Sorghum and lobia were found to be best amongst these inter cropping techniques.
In the series of being best, sorghum+green gram became better methods.
Minimum production was achieved with inter cropping technique of ground nut.
As you know the price of these crops is much more than sorghum prices hence the inter cropping of all these crops have proved to be beneficial.
Though sowing soybean has proved to be more beneficial but it would be best to sow urad because so far it has been a problem for the farmer to sell soybean.
Hence at the end it can be said that carrying the inter cropping of sorghum with urad would be more beneficial in the conditions of Kanpur in comparison to sowing sorghum.
Enduz carried an experiment in agricultural research center, samaru(Nigeria).
He adopted the relay cropping technique with dwarf variety of sorghum and lobia.
Along with one or two rows of sorghum another two rows of relay crops were sown in this experiment.
The objective of this experiment was to compare the income procured from pure sorghum crop to other cropping methods.
Further estimating the volume of plants and production competition arising due to inter cropping was also one of the objectives.
Apart from that he also wanted to know whether it is possible to do various agricultural activities through machines in this cropping method.
It can also be said that what is the scope of mechanization in this method.
Through the result of this experiment it was found that the total lifespan of annual crops in the Savanna region of South Africa is 130-200 days long and that is why inter cropping method is common.
It is possible to achieve more profit by sowing two varieties of millet in Barani region of Sudan.
In fact the `` gero `` variety matures quickly while `` mewa `` takes a longer time to mature and it was not affected by the duration of day and total radiation of sun.
Hence they can be sown together to increase the production capacity .
The selection of root and both the crops of inter cropping is done on the basis of their mutual harmony.
The complement each other and the competition reduces.
The duration of utilizing the region, place, sun, radiation, land moisture and essential nutrients are different.
The mutual harmony of these crops become the reason for the success or failure of crops.
The basis of this method is appropriate than scientific parameter.
In order to make the method of inter cropping successful and beneficial the breeding system of root and inter cropping should be transformed with modern techniques.
The opportunities of inter cropping and success in dwarf species of sorghum are best.
Thus one has to make certain changes in specific inter crops such as structure of plants, sequence of growth and action towards light.
