The meaning of entertainment news in media is Film gossip.
The ruins were once a big mansion.
I am letting it break down today.
Once upon a time this mansion was magnificent.
Long back when I saw this mansion when I had come to Calcutta from village, it was so magnificent!
I stay here at the top, come.
Hey , why are you popping your eyes out there. Don ` t ever do that , Never.
He was the middle master,after the demise of the eldest master he runs this family.
But where have they gone?
They have gone somewhere. Mind your own business.
Stay away from their talks.
Do not see anything nor hear till your stay in this house.
They are rich people, but if we do not forget our work, they are not bad for us.
Now see , I had come to this house as a teacher , the children have left learning long back but my salary and accommodation in this house are still intact. And do not worry it will stay intact forever.
Master Babu! Even for the reformation and independence of the country the rules of Brahmo samaj are best .
Only with their rules a new awakening can be set in the country.
Throwing a few bombs will not fetch anything.
Whoever threw the bomb at the dispute last day has proved to be a fool.
Yes, Yes, You wanted to keep a new worker for your factory, there is a boy for that purpose.
Yes, a boy.
He hails from village , but he is educated.
He is such a hardworking and honest boy that you will never get any complaints. He is standing outside.
Outside? Why didn ` t you tell me before?
Call him, Call him inside.
Great! You have brought such a dashing son in law middle master.
There won ` t be anybody like him in entire Calcutta.
Are you drunk master!such a son in law cannot be found in the entire country.
Look at the brightness of his eyes.
Master! You have defeated that Chaini Dutt who competes with us.
Master! Chaini dutt had also married his cat to an Indian male cat.
When I told him that our son in law has come especially from Iran, he was surprised.
You always speak bad things about the master, you should have told the real thing.
Master!I told chaini dutt that our master has spent ten thousand rupees in his cat ` s wedding, then chaini dutt was so surprised that his eyes became squinted.
Hey Beni! You fool! properly wave the fan , can ` t you see a droplet of sweat is shining on master ` s neck.
Is Suvinay Babu there?
No, he has gone to the society.
It is a big mess then.
This proof was supposed to be corrected by him, this advertisement is suppose to get published today.
Give it to me, I will get it corrected.
I remember all that , you keep reading , I am listening.
Amazing miracles of Mohini vermilion.
Whomsoever lover and beloved are bearing the pain of separateness.
Why did you stop? Please read it further.
Bhutnath Babu! Appear.
Come here, in front of me.
What did this cook tell you?
Sir, nothing.
You are lieing.
Don ` t be innocent, I have heard everything from my ears , if you are not a lier then whether I have lied to Baba. Say clearly , what did he tell?
Its just that if I took enmity with him then I will not be able to stay here.
And you silently listened to this?
Shame on you.
What is this! You have not left for home yet?
I wanted to speak to Suvinay Babu.
He is upstairs.
Actually, I also wanted to speak to you.
See, I thought a lot...
Can you think?
What have you decided?
That all the fault was mine , I should have complained about that cook before.
You are amazing brother in law!
Banshi! Banshi! What is that thing that ` s going?
Thing? Brother in law! She is elder daughter in law , little master ` s mother.
I am going for taking bath in the Ganges.
Ganges bath wearing that cloth?
Yes , Yes , she will take bath in the Ganges and she will wash her cloth as well.
Why does she put veil?
Its alright if she puts veil , but she is untouchable also , after all she is a widow.
Little bride is calling you in her room.
What? Is she calling me?
Yes , at night.
At night? But I am a man, no?
Because a strange man entering women ` s room must not be the norm of this place.
It is not the norm , but don ` t worry I will hide and take you there tonight, understand.
Lets go now, here I don ` t even have the time to talk because of work.
Bride! The brother in law has come!
Come on, go inside.
Bansi! You go from here.
Come, come here and sit.
You seem to be very coy.
They call you brother in law Babu. What shall I call you?
My father named me Atulya Chakravarti, but after his demise everybody calls me as Bhutnath, the name given by Aunt.
Yes , yes , why not, Bhutnath is such a beautiful name.
I have called you here to redress this sorrow.
Which sorrow?
You cannot understand, yet you can help me in redressing that.
Mohini this is the amount for vermilion, get me a packet.
Alright, tell me whether that vermilion is effective or not?
Inquire from them, but quietly. Don ` t tell anyone anything about me.
What are you waiting for, Don ` t be scared, you will not lose your ethnicity.
Yes, You can eat unconcernedly, we have kept a new cook, he only has served.
No, No we were not worried about that thing.
I am from village, I admit that I eat a lot of rice, still this much?
You have to eat the entire.
God knows!If a little space is left in the stomach, you will get angry on me.
Alright , tell me whether Mohini vermilion is really effective to use?
Forgive me!I have not got the chance to use it yet, by the way do you need to use it?
I wanted to ask you something?
Say, what do you want to speak?
Your mohini vermilion , that means whatever is written in the advertisement, is that all true?
The business of Mohini vermilion was started by my father.
He was a hard core old fashioned person and not a Brahmo socialist like me and even I became a Brahmo socialist after having children.
Yes, but I was talking about Mohini vermilion.
I am speaking about that only.
Goddess gave a boon of Mohini vermilion to my father in dreams.
He was old fashioned, he completely believed in this boon.
I am running the business that he had started.
Come, bhutnath come, I was waiting for you.
The sacrament for you is kept on the table.
Have you brought that thing for me?
I have brought it little bride.
Show me, show me the vermilion.
Chinta! Tell me whether the younger mister is in mansion?
No bride! He has gone out.
Listen , inform in the kitchen that I will not eat tonight , nobody shall come upstairs with food.
You go and look for Banshi.
Why have you called me here?
Why are you standing quiet, Speak.
Look at this side, just for once.
Didn ` t you see anything?
What rubbish are you talking?
I don ` t have time to sit here and see your face.
Don ` t see my face if you don ` t like to see it, but don ` t go from here today.
I beg of you.
I shouldn ` t go? But why? Do you suppose the males of this mansion to be worthless?
Does a man become worthless by staying with his wife!
Banshi! How is Bhutnath now?
Bride! He is yet not fit for the scoldings but the doctor has said that he will be fine in few days.
See , leave no stone unturned in his care , take as much money as is spent for medicine from me. Understand?
I have understood Bride!
Banshi! Was she the younger bride?
Yes my lord!The door above the stairs goes directly to the bride ` s room.
Banshi! Then why have you brought me here! This room is meant for the ladies right?
It is a yes as well as no. It is the secret room.
Fortunately! You are here today?
God knows where does this fool disappear?
You please sit for sometime , I shall call Banshi.
Hey, listen.
Do you have any work with me?
No, there is no work. It is just that I did not see you for many days.
Look at me if you have n ` t seen me. See. Did you see?
I don ` t get satisfied by just watching you like this! Even if I see your face for the entire life I won ` t be satisfied.
What rubbish are you talking? I have already told you, I am getting late.
Bhutnath! come here.
Come here Bhutnath! I am here.
Why haven ` t you lit the light younger bride.
It is good for you if you don ` t see my face today.
Today I have called you for such a work which is worth drowning for married women.
Worth drowning oneself?
Yes Bhutnath! Whom should I tell if not you?
Who else can understand my agony?
Why have you called me?
Nobody gets to know, bring liquor for me.
Younger bride! Where had you gone?
I had gone to get dry fruits for you.
Dry fruits are already kept here.
No excuses now, just drink it.
You drink it, I will have it later.
I have been drinking it since long, now you drink.
Come on, get going!
So, you have lost all your hopes?
No , No , that ` s not the matter , I hope it won ` t be much intoxicating.
The more intoxicating it will be the more prettier you will look.
Can I come inside?
Hey Bhutnath Babu Come! Just now we were talking about you, you have got a very long life.
Have you received our message?
Sir, You health is somewhat....
Yes, since when the day you left from here.
Bhutnath Babu! I have stopped the business of Mohini vermilion.
Why did you stop it? Why?
You ask why? Bhutnath Babu, I have to talk to you about so many things.
Daughter Jawa! Go and bring that letter.
Hmmm, Who Bhutnath? Hey come and sit.
Are you unwell younger Bride?
Why will the health not be good! Nowadays I always remain healthy.
Here is some money,I want to keep it with you, because I don ` t have any suitcase.
You don ` t have a suitcase? I can get you thousands of suitcases dear.
Please call Banshi.
No thanks, Keep them with you, how will I take care of them?
Bhutnath! Your younger Bride! Where the hell has she disappeared?
Hey,come closer. More closer dear.
Please give me that glass.
I have got body-ache.
Your suffering is because of the liquor younger Bride.
You do not know dear after drinking this the drooping body becomes active.
I can see, you have become addicted.
Shit , I am not addicted but...
But what?
I remain tipsy in the bug of my husband.
He wants me to drink, and I drink.
Do you know, now he remains at home every night.
Pass me the glass.
No, younger Bride! You are already rolling, you will not drink anymore.
What did you say? I shall disobey my husband and listen to you?
Bring that glass here, I will drink, definitely drink.
Then drink, consume the entire glass, make yourself peaceful.
Yes, Yes, I will drink, I shall see what wrong can you do to me.
You started drinking.
You should be ashamed of yourself.
Ashamed? What is there to be ashamed of?
Younger Babu has done such a thing for me which no man in the chaudhary clan has yet done for their wives. Just for me.
Is Baba alright Jaba?
Supavitra are you asleep, wake him up.
May be he is tired, that is why...
Wake him immediately and ask him to go to his house.
But why Jaba!Baba is in such a condition, how can he leave then?
He also has certain responsibilities being the would be son in law.
No, No, Now he has no responsibilities towards us.
And even if he does not want to go still he has to go.
Jaba, how is Baba?
why did not you wake me up before, Bhutnath Babu?
Have you called me, sir?
Yes, Bhutnath. Come.
The work of my new contract will shortly begin in Munger.
I need a trustworthy person there and if you go there then most of my worries will be away.
When do I need to go?
By tonight ` s train and you ` ll have to stay there for many months.
Go, Ghosh Babu and take money for your expenses.
The car is ready my lord.
Car? Are you again going out?
Yes, I feel suffocated sitting at home for months, let me roam today.
Tell me the truth, you stayed here for these days, didn ` t I give you the comfort?
Yes, But a wife can only give comfort younger Bride! That is not the matter...
Then do one thing, forget that I am your wife.
Yes! What are you saying?
Yes, please keep me in your farmhouse like them.
I will be happy there , at least I can see you everyday.
They change their names, you can give a new name to me as well, whatever you like.
Are you in your sense?
If you stay out like this, the name of the mansion will be ruined.
Then You say, what shall I do?
Do what elder and middle sister in law are doing, get the new ornaments out of the older ones, play with pebbles, sleep peacefully.
Why this untimely laughter?
Its amazing master! Amazing.
Chaini Dutt and younger mister are fighting in Chand Bazar.
Chaini Dutt! How dare he?
What happened to younger mister?
He is returned unconscious, younger Bride! Soaked in blood all over.
Brother in law! When did you come back?
This is the condition of mansion Banshi?
You haven ` t seen anything yet, see there, stable, all the horses are sold.
And younger Bride? How is she?
How will she be, since the day when younger mister has returned soaked in blood, she is bed-ridden.
People say that the younger mister is paralyzed.
The doping that he used to do earlier, is enclosed these days.
But younger Bride! You did not tell how is Banshi?
Oh its better if you don ` t ask, this house has completely turned upside down.
Now see brother in law! It has been seven months and I have not got the salary.
Its good, do me a favor, bring a little bit of liquor for me.
You have not been able to leave it yet?
I shall totally leave that, from tomorrow.
Yes dear, I am left with nothing apart from this.
Yet you want to sell this for that dirty object?
You assume that You shall leave it from tomorrow onward, you will not be able to abstain from that for your entire life.
This is the condition of the big mansion, younger mister is sick there and yet you are unconscious.
Recently I have come back from Munger, and I came to you as I got time.
In the meanwhile I missed you a lot.
You belong to Nadiya district right?
I was married there.
But Jeba if they wanted to own you they would not have kept quiet.
God knows they will sit quietly or not.
This secret was only known by Baba which he took away with him.
May be, but possibly your husband has got remarried yet.
Yet I am his wife.
Don ` t say like this Bride! Please don ` t.
This is my bliss.
God! I hope, he gets the years of my life.
Bhutnath! The way you understand me, none understands like that.
Listen, why don ` t you get married?
Yes dear, I always yearned for the delight of household.
Stop the car, pull down the screen.
Yes, I am opening it Sahib!
Yes brother! who are you, where are you going?
I have to catch Berex Express.
Hey, are there any bombs in the boot of your car?
sir, bombs will be found 20 kms further from here, Shall we go?
Yes, lets go,move the car.
Oh, it is too cold, I will die of shivering here.
And there is nobody at this station.
Hey station master! you only will have to do the last rituals.
Hey Brother! Uncle! Do you have a match box?
Nothing, I am satisfied by the fact that you are alive.
What do you think the train will arrive, if yes then will it depart from here?
Do you think that India has progressed so much in fifty years of independence?
He is saying that we are not independent.
It is thriving, the small leaders of the village after being rich have begun to rob ourselves.
Has independent India advanced?
No, the Central government, intimidates us, is unjust with our innocent citizens and says that we are independent.
Will we call it freedom?
Speak loudly, loudly.
Alright, what do you think India has progressed much or not?
Shukla Jee! Can you see anything?
The bell of death.
Don ` t be afraid.
There is nothing to be ashamed of death.
Shukla Jee! You are too much.
This is for radio, so it would be nice if you speak in Hindi please.
You will not speak in my language then shall I speak in your language?
It is not like that, I have prepared the questions in English.
Thank You, First of all I wanted to ask you that you look exactly like us.
Like us, absolutely normal.
What did you think?
What is your objective?
From your government, from India.
From where do you get your weapons?
From where did you get this courage?
I have heard that China and Pakistan are helping you.
Weapons are supplied here from their border.
I cannot tell you anything.
You handed guns to small children, you made them terrorists.
Only for your selfish interest.
This is wrong, you have met me twice yet refusing to identify.
Stop stalking me.
You have to decide this.
Why will I have to do that?
I don ` t like this.
I don ` t believe.
See, what is your problem?
Your family, caste, religion or the two goons who took you to the train?
I do not know who they are, but I can even talk to them.
You go from here.
Will you come along?
I am not such a girl as you are thinking of me.
You do not know what I am thinking.
I have found you with such difficulty, how do I leave it so easily?
See, either you go and tell this to your family or I shall tell them.
Think about it and tell me tomorrow.
But, what do you know about me?
Nothing. Just that I love you.
See, I don ` t believe in one sided love.
There must be something between us, otherwise the matter wouldn ` t have reached here.
The only difference is that you are not willing to confess the truth and I am confessing it.
Why, what happened, you don ` t have the courage?
Leave me alone.
Give the answer of my question, I will not trouble you then after.
You do not know anything.
She has come.
Why have you come with the procession?
Actually, I wanted to apologize to the girl, why are they both coming, who are they?
He is her husband.
You also have two wives.
Come on buddy! There is a big difference between a wife and a husband.
Listen! I need to speak to you.
There is call for Amar bhaiya.
Say brother! How are you?
Grandmother! Amar bhaiya is on phone.
Please ask him, there are no letters, no telegrams and i am getting older.
Brother! Why don ` t you write letters, grandma is getting older.
When is he coming back?
When are you coming brother? Come soon. Alright.
Pass the phone to mummy.
Hey, did you recognize me?
Are you alone?
Your husband is not visible?
Have you sent him to beat anyone?
He is not my husband.
Then are you searching for a new husband these days?
What is your name, where are you coming from and for what purpose you are here?
I am Amarkant Verma.
You must have come for the festival coverage.
Hey, I am talking to you.
what is your name?
I am deceived, I was beaten, I was left half dead in a lonely place and today I become your husband?
Don ` t you think i have a few questions whose answers you have.
I even want to curse you but with what relation?
Come with me, Come.
Lamajee! Do you understand Hindi?
Alright, I want to marry her.
Forgive us Lamajee! He is crazy.
Suppose that we are married.
Hmm, not now, we don ` t have time now.
Suppose that we got married.
What do you think, we will stay happily together?
Love and only, incalculable, is n ` t it?
Then, there will be quarrels,heads will be banged, hands will be fractured.
But let me be very clear, I will not give up, you only will have to come first for apologizing.
Do you know what does it mean to kill one like this, that you love me a lot.
And yes, killing me like this means that you love me a lot.
It also means that you cannot live without me.
Yes, really I will die.
Now we will not fight nor argue, we will only talk nicely.
Now you say what is the thing that you like the most.
Don ` t think, tell me quickly, I will count till three, One, two,...
The pigeons of the temple.
Now, tell me that what do you like the most?
I don ` t like you coming closer to me.
Your smile, your frolic, happiness.
Wrong, actually you are jealous of me.
Yes, you tell me, what do you like?
Hmmm ,first of all I will tell you what I dislike the most.
The thing that I hate the most is the distance between two of us.
And the most of the things that are hidden inside you.
And I hate your eyes the most.
Even if I try a lot to see inside it , I do not see anything.
It is time to do the work.
The Passport is ready, entry passes have been arranged.
The dress rehearsal will be on Friday.
And car passes and all?
Don ` t use them.
Before that you speak anything, shall I say something?
Can I call u `` tum `` ?
There was a boy whom I loved.
He also loved me a lot.
One teaspoon sugar?
By the the I am telling you this because my family is fixing my marriage and I don ` t want that you?
A,a,a, by the way I have also faced the same situation.
I mean that girl, You loved her secretly or did you ever touch her and all?
Anyway, i don ` t want the answer, I just wanted to see whether you got a setback or not?
And if I ask you the same question, then?
Well,what do you guess after seeing me?
I think that you talk a lot and also that there is a salad at the top of your nose at this point of time.
But 80% of the girls today are escapists.
Who are thinking about that girl, right?
You are telling the truth or lieing?
Well, leave that lie and tell some lies about me.
What lie shall I tell about you?
This that I am a very beautiful and a wonderful girl etc. , etc..
You are a very beautiful and a wonderful girl etc. , etc..
Thank You! You tell lies very lovingly.
They have come uncle!
What are you doing among the elderly, go with the kids.
Yes, then what did you both decide?
Uncle! After having lunch we were coming by the bus, then a boy started running, amar started running after him, I started running after Amar, and we did not get time for talking while running.
Yes or no? I am just asking, tell.
Actually, how can I say a yes so early?
We have just met.
Its a yes from my side.
I did not say!
God knows what the police would have pumped out of him.
I have faith he would not have opened his mouth.
He must not have said anything.
Now stop crying.
He was like Meghna ` s brother.
Nobody is a brother and sister here and we have neither come for crying here.
He was a warrior who lost his life in battle.
He did not die as somebody ` s brother.
What will we do by staying here?
This is your room.
He was my father, it was his room.
No, he doesn ` t exist now.
There is a call for you.
Can I get inside?
I am afraid.
I am getting married.
Till now I was happy but as the days are coming closer I feel I might get stuck.
Everything will be fine.
Amar and you make a good couple.
Are you telling the truth?
It is good that you came all of a sudden.
I always reach suddenly.
Buddy! My younger mother in law passed away.
How are you here then?
I fought and got transferred here.
To Mrs. Burman?
That is not the matter shukla Jee! It is not what you are understanding.
What shall I understand brother! On one side You are getting married and on the other side walking with your girlfriend.
Instead of driving her out you are giving her the job also, great brother!
Yes she has also stayed inside my raincoat.
What are you saying? Inside the raincoat of your house?
Oh! you have cocked up everything.
Will you keep quiet for a minute, shall I speak?
I don ` t know why she went leaving me.
I even do not know why she came back.
What will happen to them?
They will suffer because of us, right?
They are not bad people.
What wrong did they do?
Those who trusted us, gave us shelter will lose everything.
Are we doing the right thing?
The innocents will lose their lives.
What was the total number of people?
I don ` t remember well, there were three men, two women or two women, three men.
How were they, what do you mean?
I mean what was their language, were they Bengali, Assamese, Naga, what were they?
I have no idea about this.
This is Army ` s car, what is this photo doing in your studio?
A man had come and given this for copying.
It must be one of his businesses.
Please remain seated.
Yes, I saw this, this notice in the newspaper.
It was published few days back.
Yes , but I saw this yesterday only.
No, the man who was stalking her in cannaught place.
Do you know him?
I broke my leg because of him, my dog Mowgli almost died because of him.
Who are you and with what right you are asking me this question?
Investigation Officer, who else is there in your group?
I don ` t belong to any group, Sir.
I am also a government servant, I told you last day that I work in AIR,I am a program executive and I do not know anything apart from this.
You will not be able to go out of this room if you don ` t tell the truth.
Please don ` t try to threaten me, I am also a government servant, ok?
My father was there in the Indian Army, he was killed; and my father fought for independence in INA, went in prison and even I am worried for the country.
Whoa are you and why have you come here?
Now don ` t lie to me,I am harassed listening your lies.
why did that boy ran after watching me?
Me looking at him was a coincidence or was he sent intentionally to entrap me?
He has died.
You came to my house, you did not ask me for a job, you asked for a job to AIR.
I pursued you like crazy and you used me Meghna.
Inspector sahib Salute!This boy is like our brother, if you could suppress this matter then?
He has slapped the constable.
I know, now whatever is left is in your hand.
No. No, I do not want money, this is women ` s issue dear!
Hey, keep this. You have become independent, now go from here.
Meghna! Do one thing, come closer to me.
Amar! Are you alright?
I have not died, I will not die unless I stop you.
Please come closer to me.
Where are you?
You cannot come here.
Sir, I need the permission!
Army has to check all those vehicles that are engaged for parade.
What are you saying?
I am sorry sir! I would also like to check the tank which will salute the president.
This is not a valid demand.
What has happened to you Amar?
I want to inquire about Meghna, I have to stop them.
Amar! Why don ` t you understand, this matter is not our cup of tea.
The CBI people also consider you to be a terrorist.
Oh god! Let one more wicket get down then immediately I will, no no not immediately, I will pray after my son is born, will offer curtain.
One more wicket my lord!
Get up, it is nine o ` clock, get up.
Get up, who sleeps by nine o ` clock in the morning?
It is your mother ` s fault, she has spoilt you.
You are worthless.
There are some rules of this house and you cannot do these things here.
You can do nothing but can only drain the resources.
This is the last day of is fun, from tomorrow he will accompany me to the field.
I am raising a donkey of twenty years.
I do not know where the money is spent but I become happy after seeing you.
I need money for field ` s electricity.
And your father will not take free electricity from the government, after all he is an egoist.
Then be a big man soon, before we become bankrupt.
There is water for drinking, not to throw at faces.
This is not a fake excuse.
When I will show what I have brought for you, then you will bent on your knees asking for apologies.
How will I understand, if you ` ll be so late?
But you will definitely understand that. Good bye.
And the last thing, don ` t forget the three rules of throwing inswinger balls.
This is enough for today.
I will take it when I am in a condition to give you something.
Like father, like son.
sister! Please give me a chance to help you.
By the grace of god we are prosper.
Truly speaking, Abdul asked me to give you some money.
You know I have no shame in asking you for money, but Anwar will not agree.
Abi has a sharp brain.
He tops every exam.
I will make him an engineer.
Sister! You know I am not competing with you.
My Iqbal has high dreams, he will definitely do something.
It is not the age for him to work in fields.
He has grown such old to eat and sleep like a man.
He understands everything.
Do you understand Iqbal?
See son! It is not too late.
We cannot spend our lives grazing cattle and dreaming, right?
Look at Aby, he is so clever, doing something with his life.
I know you cannot do that but...
You can earn your living if you learn farming and can even do something for the motherland.
Well, both of you listen, he wants some time.
I have given him one year ` s time.
One year, after which he will work with me in farm.
I wanted to give this to you since afternoon.
Brother! Leave me I have to do my homework.
The fault is mine, I should have continued his studies.
If You had money, you also would have definitely sent him to a special school of Mumbai.
He would have definitely made a couple of friends there, all his childhood friends have moved ahead, our Iqbal is left alone.
Yet my son is happy.
Don ` t get so worried Anwar.
You ` ll see, he will himself find his way.
What is he asking?
That why did I do this?
I asked that when will he play for the Indian team, when I will get old?
And also this that my back aches sitting here everyday.
Since when is this going?
I have been doing this for six months Guruji, and brother is doing this regularly for two years.
He does not speak and you keep on talking.
Actually, he is deaf and dumb but if you will speak slowly he will read your lips and understand.
Your sister says that you are the best player of the world and none in my academy can compete with you.
His bowling is better that his talks.
your father will definitely not agree for this.
We do not have any way.
you are right children! Now I cannot tall lies to your father.
Alright, I will not say anything to him now.
Brother is milking the cow, father will suspect.
My mother, you do not need to get worried.
It will be a mess.
What is going here?
I am busy in myself but I am not that fool.
Your adorable is milking the cow.
He does it everyday.
So early in the morning?
Actually you have given him a year ` s time, he wants to make you happy.
No, I don ` t believe, something is wrong.
When someone is standing between you and your wicket then the story becomes something else, right?
Definitely you have a bowling pace but only till you use it like a weapon, it does not matter whether you throw a ball or a sweet till then.
sorry Sir! In a haste I said face instead of pace.
I said that he should make his face a weapon and throw a ladoo( sweet) with it.
You please speak slowly.
Why don ` t you get going with your and your sister ` s ugly faces?
And you forgot that I can hear everything and brother if you will speak such softly then anyone can understand.
I know that it was not an accident.
I also know that Kamal was mocking at you.
Yes, Yes on Khatija also.
But many times I asked him to control his anger.
How long will this go on?
Nothing can harm me, I have to drink and sleep.
You are ruining your life.
What kind of a absurd joke is this?
Damn first my father and then you.
Why are you hounding of my life?
Inject me with this omnious injection and give me the medicine also.
And if there is some medicine for this headache, give that also.
I lied to you.
Even after twenty years ageing has not made me weak.
Take one draught and everything will be fine.
I need only one draught.
I need only one draught, I am not asking you for the entire bottle.
Am I coaching you or you are coaching me?
Why do I need to bowl now , am I crazy?
I shall teach you a couple of things after which you only have to bowl.
After all, I am the coach.
It is great.
It is enough for today.
I knew that, you will say something like this.
First of all we have to think that how will we talk to each other.
You had called me here for this lecture or you want to say something else?
You don ` t like me at all, right?
I don ` t want my brother to be upset again and in any case it won ` t last long.
You will start drinking again.
I was telling him the same thing but only if he understands.
God says that it is bad to consume alcohol.
But God says a lot many things.
I drink alcohol so that his voice does not reach my ears.
And if you have calculated my sins then shall we do some work?
Bowling does not mean that at every ball you will try to hit the stump.
There must be somebody who ` ll stop you.
It is the game of mind which is played with heart.
Why does any batsman hit your ball?
Because he has understood you.
He has read you.
He can look into your mind as to what kind of the ball you are throwing?
That means you make the batsman do all those things that you wish him to do.
It is very complicated.
Yes, it is complicated but not impossible.
I will teach you little tactics, the real magic will be done by you.
When did you get this bruise?
This will not do.
In the past I used to call this Mohit special Chakravyuh.
The past always chases you.
I am sorry I can ` t call you inside.
Iqbal ` s father hates the mere word cricket.
Yes, I know, I shall take only one minute.
Tomorrow it is Iqbal ` s birthday, give it to him.
Don ` t tell him that I have given this , he will refuse.
I thank you on his behalf.
Listen, don ` t let him get disheartened.
Because if it happens then I ` ll kill you.
The women of this house seem to be very dangerous.
Don ` t worry, you daughter has already threatened me.
I am going to Farida ` s house with the children tomorrow.
Make sure his unemployed husband doesn ` t teach his useless things to my son.
Instead of serving the motherland he rather keeps sitting, crouching people.
I will make sure he remains away with them.
Iqbal has not come for two days, is he not well?
For god ` s sake please don ` t come here Mohit jee! If my husband sees you here, he will kill you.
Well now the men also, I thought that I should only fear the women of this house.
Iqba; ` s father has come to know, now he takes him to the field for work; may be the god doesn ` t like whats happening.
I do not like whats happening now.
Anwar sahib, a cricketer works no less than a farmer!Because of his hard work and without even playing a single match your son has been selected for Ranji team.
It has not happened till date, yet you doubt his talent?
Look , I can foresee his future.
He is really different.
The success of Andhra is amazing this time.
The new bowler Iqbal khan has maintained an average of eight wickets in every match.
Even I miss the brother a lot.
He wants to come back home but after seeking his father ` s permission.
We won today ` s match also.
I took six wickets.
Father is also good.
Mother! I need you.
I never knew that an ordinary game will spoil our lives.
It was never about that game Anwar.
Whatever I did, I did for him.
You know this is not the truth.
You have fulfilled the duties of a father but made him responsible for your difficulties.
Mohit! You boy is really wonderful.
Yes, such a player is found once in a millennium, this year Ranji trophy is ours.
Mohit! don ` t be crazy, you know that business and deals have become the integral part of this game.
Brother! We have got to go.
We wanted to see you playing, we have no option but to go.
Is there any money problem?
No. No, no, there is no need for that.
Now I have got the stamina to fight again.
Don ` t panic son! We will keep watching you on TV.
Khan Sahib! How does it feel to be a father of such a talent son?
Brother! He is the best cricketer in the world.
Well, it is god ` s grace.
Hello Iqbal! Can we talk once?
Can ` t we sit?
It was bad that you had to leave the academy then but there was no other option left also.
The actual problem is that at this point of time the Indian team needs a batsman not a bowler.
Whom are you searching?
I don ` t know whats going on in your mind but remember that your father and your future are hanging with a delicate thread.
Please don ` t spoil the matter.
Very touchy, the disciple is handling his teacher.
You have committed a big mistake my not listening to me.
Now I ` ll see , who takes you to the Indian team and how.
Keep playing cricket in the fields with your drunkard teacher.
I hope I am not disturbing you people.
Oh, I wanted to meet the colypod Express.
A bowler can only know the worth of a bowler.
Dear, Your Indian team is losing the chance.
Its ok, better luck next time.
Well done, tell him that the Indian team needs such a player right now.
Hey, Open the door.
The door can ` t be opened, the train is scheduled to arrive at 12:50.
But it is not 12 o ` clock yet.
But what is my mistake in this uncertainty Sahib?
I will not open this door before one at any cost.
Between twelve and one spirits come here, spirits!
How did you get this?
It fell from your pocket.
Go back, Is your beloved Narendra sitting here that you have come?
The one who sacrificed her life in order to save others life.
Was she a goddess?
Yes, a goddess, untouchable by birth but a goddess by virtue.
She loved him because he was not like other boys.
How will you find if anyone puts you inside a cage, well we will feel bad, right Kasturi?
The train stops when you show the red flag; it starts running when you show the red flag.
The boy was a Brahman by caste and the girl was untouchable, then their parents were good friends.
A snake has stung, I have called the priest-doctor.
There is nothing to be scared now, I have sucked all the venom.
Forgive me Pandit jee! I have touched you, what to do, your life was at risk.
Take this and bring some grocery from Mohan Uncle ` s shop.
shall I tell where was she, she was roaming around with Pratap sitting in the car.
Oh, god has given me such a naughty daughter.
Very soon we will have to search a groom for her.
I have even found one.
How is your son today?
Well the fever is down but, he has become very weak.
Brother! This is malaria, it takes time to recover, are you giving him quinine regularly?
His mother went to the doctor, she refused for Quinine and gave him another medicine.
Now suffer, I gave him quinine for free , but you don ` t feel satisfied unless you fill Babulal ` s pocket.
She went back and the doctor said that one cannot get rid of disease unless one spends money.
Don ` t believe her.
You have been very lenient towards Pratap, he must be sitting somewhere talking to Kasturia.
Did you forget those days when both of us like Pratap and kasturi used to hover around the well.
Ours was a different case, both of us were pf the same caste but Kasturia and Pratap?
God forbid if...
what can I get at one rupee.
How would I know, its your shop, give me whatever I can get at this price.
I know how to cook.
Wonderful! Well, what are the dishes that you can cook?
Ask father if you don ` t believe.
Yes, of course, he will definitely talk like you.
Alright then ask Pratap, he also has eaten the food prepared by me.
Babulal! I have also heard from Mohanlal that you don ` t know anything about medicine.
Let him go to hell , our forefathers have been into medicine since fifteen generations and I will not know how to treat.
Anyways child, I will not be called as Babulal doctor until I teach you a lesson.
Tell me how to teach these fools.
That is why Mohan is so courageous to consider them as fools.
But I have not been to mohanlal jee ` s place.
You are safe, otherwise he would have said that you don ` t have fever.
But doctor Babulal doesn ` t agree with the patients.
Yes, since when are you having fever.
you are right brother! The girl has grown up, we should get her married now.
and yes, we are also getting Pratap married, his mother has gone to see the bride.
Well, Pratap will get so many girls by god ` s grace but who will marry Kasturi without dowry?
Don ` t worry about that, whatever dowry is brought by Pratap will be given for Kasturi ` s marriage.
But brother! How can it happen?
I cannot forget your previous obligations.
Forget them but remember that Kasturi is my daughter as well.
I shall get her married.
Meera! Are you getting married?
I wish, your husband is not like mine who is never even seen around me.
I will stay at their place but your parents want to keep your husband as a son in law.
Daughter! Talks change with the changing times.
The things are not the same as they were during childhood.
What is there now, won ` t be there in the future.
Playing games was not considered bad during childhood then how can it be considered bad today?
Now who will argue with you?
I am not arguing father, I only want to know.
God has given you birth at an untouchable ` s home and Pratap in a Brahman ` s family.
Then why shall we leave them?
Daughter! This is how the world behaves, here you have sorrows as well as pleasure.
Have you come to invite for the wedding?
Whether you invite or not, I will definitely come.
My parents are handling the responsibility of inviting people.
So, tomorrow you ` ll go to your in laws ` s house?
I wish I could accompany you to see the bride.
Where is your father, won ` t he see the bride?
He is ill, he can ` t even sit and get up.
I want to see him.
Daughter! I am taking Dukhiya to my home.
He needs to be taken care of.
You will handle the work of this place.
Yes, but how will stay alone without father?
don ` t worry daughter! Your father will recover and come back soon.
And keep visiting there when you feel bad.
Is this true that Dukhiya is staying at your home?
Mohan has spoilt his religion, now we will not let him reside int he village.
You have kept a impure person to your house, is this what brahmins do?
Release me if you want but tell me whether untouchables are humans or not?
Don ` t they have life and knowledge of sorrow and pleasure like us?
Whether it is a Brahmin or an untouchable all are children of a single father.
When god does not discriminate, then what right do we humans have to discriminate on the basis of caste?
You only say, you are a doctor, whether the fever of Brahmans is different from those of untouchables in medicine science?
Brahmans have one kind of cholera and the untouchables another?
Service is the religion of man.
Kasturi! I could not do anything for elder brother Mohan, now we only trust god.
Do you have a duty at this door?
There is an information by the guard sahib of mailing department that riots have erupted in this village, do you know about this?
Yes, Yes, my lord! It happened in front of my eyes.
The doctor, Babulal is the root cause of all brawl.
I shall go to the village for investigation, I ` ll call you if there is any need.
Let me get the luggage from the station but where will we go father?
don ` t worry brother, we will pass our days peacefully beneath the trees standing here.
Hey, your foes shall stay beneath the trees, live in this station until you get work.
Brother! you are very honest.
You tell me the real matter without hesitation, who raised the dispute, who were involved in this, who ignited Mohanlal ` s shop?
Oh, as if the poor does not know anything, the fight in which you brilliantly broke mohanlal ` s head and set his shop on fire.
No lord! He himself broke his head and set his shop on fire to frame poor me.
Lord, I admit that I fought with Mohanlal but I got irritated of him lord.
Absolutely lord! Absolutely crazy, ask them all, they know it all.
Alright inspector jee! They must have got irrigated by my dogma.
Alright, You are Mohanlal.
Well, I ` ll have to invoice these people.
Therefore get the report written and identify these people.
Lord! I have no complaints for anybody neither can I identify anybody.
But its a grave crime, therefore these people will be sued by the government.
Arrest and take them to the police station.
Kajari ` s parents have sent me to see whether you are really getting married again?
What shall I do if not this, they are not even sending back Kajari.
They are even ready to give you their property, but you are not agreeing.
I am happy being poor but I cannot feed on my in laws money.
So does the marriage with Dukhiya ` s daughter has been fixed?
Father got us engaged during childhood now destiny has again brought us together.
What has happened to them if I am getting married; go and tell them I don ` t care.
Who is this sahib who is smiling at you?
She stays in this village.
I know one of the women but the other...
Yes, Yes, I am asking the other one.
Hey, there is a spicy news, Kasturi ` s marriage has been fixed and fortunately the groom is also nice.
Mannu, who has come at Dukhiya ` s place.
But how shall we arrange for money?
I only know this that I love you.
Kasturi! Listen to me, let abscond somewhere.
Won ` t you come Kasturi?
No, No Pratap! I can ` t do this.
We are not destined to be together, you are a Brahman and I am an untouchable.
Pratap! I can ` t get away from this marriage.
God! Why did you make me an untouchable.
I no more a kid now that I ` ll remain quiet.
Doesn ` t matter if he got married again, I am also married to him, how can he leave me?
If he had cared a little for you he would have come, no?
We gave him house,property but he also refused everything.
They called her many times but did you also sent her?
I will go and stay there.
I felt something lacking in my life, you filled it up.
My heart was desolated, you set it peaceful.
As the days pass your love enters my heart.
You are very kind, me and my father have your so many obligations.
Do you love somebody else? Tell me.
How shall I say? God, why are you giving me pain again and again?
I have hurt you more by asking, forgive me.
No Meera! Forgive me, I spoilt your life.
By promise and deed I was yours but not with heart.
My heart knows that I tried a lot but all in vain.
I belong to Kasturi and will be hers forever.
I love her, that it why I married her.
So what? You are my master, I am your married woman, how shall I leave my right?
Where were you until now that you have now come to ruin my world of love and comfort.
I would have made her go back but she refused.
Kasturi ` s nature is somewhat different.
Yes brother! Neither am I jealous nor fearing.
And moreover she has handed over her husband to his other wife.
why are you so sad Kasturi?
Will you not tell me?
Don ` t ask, I do not know anything, I only know that your service is my duty.
Destiny has brought us here and there is no exemption from destiny.
Kasturi do you need an exemption?
Kasturi! Doesn ` t love Mannu.
That is why she welcomed me.
Whether any woman will hand over a second woman to her husband.
It has been so long I have come here but you never looked at me.
What shall I do, its your destiny.
But your, mine and Kasturi ` s destiny are the same.
Kasturi! I am going to take the salary, you do the work of showing the green signal, but listen, carefully.
Yes, Yes, I know this work very well.
But who taught you this?
I love him from the bottom of my heart and he runs away from me.
Yes, your mother has sent me to ask about your well being.
Tell him that I am good and I am firm on my decision.
Alright then I am leaving, your parents remain worried about you.
Hey you should have served something to your brother.
He has always had good food.
You have also come?
Have you seem Meera and Kajari anywhere?
No, I have not seen them.
I did not even know that you have come to the fair.
Meera did not even tell me.
Kasturi! Do you remember the days when he had no worries and all the time was spent in sports.
Such were the days!
Pratap! Now, don ` t make me recall those days.
Kasturi can never do this.
You are lieing.
Alright, ask Meera then.
She will never tell lies.
Yes, Yes, Kajri is telling the truth, Kasturi did n ` t come.
You have lost yourself in her love.
Oh! What did we do!
What if they kill him?
Oh God! What will happen now?
Indian musical films began with the first talking film ` Alamara ` (1931) and the first film song was ` de de khuda ke nam pe pyare, takat hai agar dene ki ` which was sung by W. M. Khan and was composed by Firozshah Mistri.
Harmonium, tabor and flute were the main instruments.
since background music had not arrived, the songs were sung by the artists themselves and since they were not totally expert in singing, it was necessary that the songs which were composed by them were simple in construction and of low velocity.
Most of the artists came from parsi theatre or ` kotha ` culture, therefore their musical style contained the imprints of their roots-they were either in the form of nasal, forcible and artificial singing or composing the tunes of elaborate oral interactive style of Parsi theater.
When the music directors used to be the paid workers of studio during studio system days, on one side we see Damodar Sharma for Paramount and Sundardas Bhatia giving music in this style for sarj movie tones alone.
While on the other side the Madan theaters of Kolkata was known for its Parsi theater style whose tunes were composed by Brajlal Verma and the songs were sung by the then superstar Nisar and the gorgeous skittish Jahan Ara khan.
Anil Biswas was the first film music director who used chorus for representing the voice of the community in his compositions inspired by society -politics and awareness.
Some of the songs among them are not only patriotic but they question the basic contradictory inequalities in the Indian society and advocate changes.
O. P. Nayyar maintained this streak through his trotting beat rhythm based songs ` mang ke sath tumhara ` , ` ude jab jab zulfein teri ` , ` piya piya na lage mora jiya and ` ek pardesi mera dil le gaya ` of ` Naya daur ` (1957), ` Fagun ` (1958).
Vasant Desai made the use of marathi traditional style-Pavda lavani and theaticals with songs like ` bhai savdhan saun bhawar ud jaega ` and ` dekho meri umariya hai bali (inebriate poet Ram Joshi, 1947).
Shankar-Jaykishan used the effects of eastern Europe and middle Asia and alongside the new sound effects which was like the breeze of fresh air and which was towards the viewers of Rajkapoor ` s social and luminous movies.
O. P. Nayyar ` s treasure not only contained Punjabi folk beats but it also had the integration of western peppy influences like ` ae dil mushkil hai jeena yaha ` (C.I.D, ` 1956) and ` Babuji dhire chalna ` ( Aar. Par. ` 1956), and the ` Rumba ` full of vivacity of rhythm which established club songs as a special education in the Indian film music among the viewers of 1950 and 1960.
Later, Qawwali also became popular as an musical knowledge in Indian films, especially the expertise of Raushan gave it wondrous success such as ` Ye ishq Ishq hai Ishq ` ( Barsat ki rat, 1960), ` Nigahein milane ko jee chahta hai ` ( dil hi to hai, 1963), Wakif hu khoob Ishq ke tarje bayan se mai ` (Bahu Begam, 1969) etc.
At the end of 1960s , Jazz entered hindi film music, which was initiated by Shankar-jaikishan(who came up with his album- Raaga in Jazz), where music invariably became strident.
While music directors like Shantanu Moitra along with lyricist like Swanand Kirkire present the sophisticated integration of good poetry and music in an exotic way with films like ` Hazaro khwahishe aisi ` , A. R. Rahman and M. M Karim have given lovely music using original sufi sentiments and high tone Islamic homage.
Jawed Sahib gave two reasons of his sorrow.
One is this that today people of English are contributing in witting the script of Hindi films while they do not have proper knowledge of Hindi and Urdu.
The second according to Jawed Sahib is that the actors today are more responsible for the plight of scripts in hindi films because their biggest problem is not at all being close to Hindi or Urdu literature.
As some people see the influence of English on the ` Hindi ` of Hindi cinema, similarly some people could not tolerate the reference of ` Urdu ` with Hindi cinema in the past.
In the essay entitled ` Cinema, Language, Radio: A triangular history ` a small reference comes that Sahir Ludhiyanvi who gave innumerable immortal songs to the Hindi films had once been to Bihar during 1960s and had said in a gathering that 97 percent of the language of Hindi films is Urdu.
A letter was published on the ` chale pawan ki chaal ` page of journal.
The one who had written this had written his name as ` Filmeshwar ` and the title of the letter was ` An open letter to Sahir, an opportunist who stoked the flames of hatred in the name of Hindi and Urdu.
The letter is interesting because according to this it is actually Hindi what Sahir considers to be Urdu for being written in Persian script.
Whether it is about today ` s Jawed Akhtar or yesterday ` s Sahir Ludhiyanvi or some one named ` Filmeshwar ` , everybody believes that the form of language spoken in Hindi films will definitely be one in the story which is being shown to the viewers.
In the view of ` Filmeshwar ` this language is Hindi, and for Sahir Ludhiyanvi it is Urdu and for Jawed Akhtar it is Hindi/Urdu.
If we take away the the language of the dialogues of Hindi films from the dispute of Hindustani or English we see that it is the world of multiple sounds, we see that the adjective ` Hindi films ` is just a derivative term- a word binary that binds multiple languages in the cover of single language.
We will be able to see that the dialogues of Hindi cinema are not framed as per the ` common culture ` but also to make the credibility of the characters in the story and the characters of the story are framed assuming the ` average viewers which keeps changing in time.
By 1960s Hindi cinema understood that its average viewers have changed.
Not only the size of middle class increased but also its taste and it identifies its taste in Hinglish, the language of its aspirations , the Hinglish which is framed from the news of the newspapers to the advertisements on television.
Why is this mourning then that ` English rules Hindi films ` .
If it is essential for us to associate an adjective Bhishm Pitamah of Indian Cinema then it could be V. shantaram.
The way Bhishma Pitamah had established kuru lineage, similarly as a father, shantaram gave shape,accomplishment with power and potential to famous historical film making institutions like ` Prabhat ` and ` Raj kamal kala mandir `
When Himanshu Rai was depending on foreign technicians for technical excellence , right there Shantaram without any technical guidance and help was developing his cinema on his land with his resources, using new innovations.
V. Shantaram was born on 18th november 1901 and died in 1990.
His parents lower middle class Maharashtrians and worked in itinerant theatrical troupes.
Shantaram ` s infancy and childhood was spent in maternal house of Kolhapur.
Then he kept roaming around various places of Maharashtra experiencing the theatrical troupes with his father.
He got the master of film initiation as Baburam Painter and kept learning all the works from hero to carrier such as brooming cleaning, carpentry, lab, makeup, rehearsal, acting, editing-direction.
After working for 9 years there Shantaram got the mastery in all the parts of film making including acting, direction.
During April-May 1929 shantaram, Damle, Pattelal, dhaybar, kulkarni-these five people decided to jointly establish a new film making institution separating from the Maharashtra film company.
Right after two years of establishment of ` Prabhat ` the first Hindi voiced film was made and released.
Under ` Prabhat ` , Shantaram ` s last three films- ` Kunku ` , ` Manus ` and ` Shejari(Marahi), ` Duniya na mane ` , ` Adami ` , ` Padosi ` (Hindi),were released in different names for the viewers of both the languages and is still memorable among the cinema analysts for its wonderful experimentation and social matter.
When Shantaram separated from ` Prabhat ` he was 42 years old.
He first got married to vimlawati in 1922, and by then actress Jayashri had also come into his life.
He also had three children.
A new venture at such an age and in such situation could not be thought of.
But shantaram was made of some different metal.-
` Prabhat ` was the first chapter of Shantaram ` s cine personality, while the second is ` Rajkamal ` , which has its own glorious history and which is not possible here because of lack of place.
Yet its fame pillars ` Dr. Kotnis ` s immortal love story ` , ` Do ankhen bara hath ` , ` jhanak jhanak payal baje ` and ` navrang ` will always be remembered in the development journey of Indian cinema and also the god father personality of Shantaram.
I am deeply aware of all the films of anand and the name of the film gave a jerk on the introduction.
The major reason of the jerk which I could feel was that we are living in those times where a certain kind of melancholy is seen in Marxist pavilion and it was not expected that Anand will remain untouched from it.
But the ill-expectation had reduced with the name of the film.
` Jai Bheem comrade ` is a creative tribute to Vilaas Ghogre, Aanand ` s friend and a popular revolutionery- dalit singer.
Perhaps ` Jai Bheem comrade ` is Anand ` s first film where apart from politics many cultural and social painful stories have turned up primarily.
If we look carefully at the aforesaid popular words of Vilas ` s songs then ` Garib ki karun katha ` is not a plain term, it also has an appeal to see the social-cultural aspect.
` Jai Bheem comrade ` fulfills its strong appeal in the cine world.
Datta Samant, the popular trade union and communist leader was murdered on 16th January, 1997 and thus the history of organized-struggle of mill workers comes to an end.
The politics of Bal Thakre ` s Maratha-pride is at its peak now.
Police suppressses the dalits filing their complaints against the insult of Ambedkar ` s statue in the Ramabai colony of Mumbai on 1st July, 1997 and tens of protesters are killed by the Police guns and after this incident poet Vilas Ghogre retributes by committing suicide.
` Irony ` is that the poet who kept singing the elegy of life being the follower of Marxism himself became a touching story at the end.
But the important aspect of the irony is that at the time of suicide Vilas had not put a red flag on his head but had wrapped a blue ribbon.
The suggestive stopgap of ideology almost a message, for those who live a elegiac life of poverty and lesson to those who are the well wishers of proletarian but who instead of remembering the socio-cultural condition of Indian proletarian stuck to the economic basis of class-struggle.
The first part of the film furls the incident of Ramabai colony and the extreme expansion of Dalit-Ambedkar politics.
The cultural festivals work as an excellent weapon to know the strength of any kind of identity politics and its hold on the society.
A big dalit leader says in the film that there are two kinds of Ambedkarites, one who are the admirers of Ambedkar and others who are the followers of Ambedkar, not egoistic admirers.
During the bridgehead government of BJP and shivsena ` s, there were police oppression in Ramabai colony.
Manohar Joshi used to be the chief minister then.
He believed that those who take the name of Ambedkar are not Ambedkarites but Naxalites.
The alliance of Congress and national congress came into power after five years and its behavior was also no different.
The second half of the film works as a back turn for professional thinkers.
For the next generation of Vilas Bhogre, Kabeer kala manch is a cultural organization of dalit youth.
The organization is neither corporate nor NGO fed.
Neither can it be said to be a cultural stage of any party.
While a section of dalit thinkers is justifying the colonial ghost and the imperialist expansion of America talking about the reclaim of English, ` Kabeer kala manch ` of Ambedkarite dalit men and women are swiping the western cultural slavery,giving creative frowning to the courage of denying the market system and culture through its theaters and songs
The film ends with the international message that Indians should reconsider the social and cultural aspect of Indian Marxist Indian proletarian.
They should incorporate the revolutionary aspects of Ambedkar ` s vision.
If the the ideologies of ` Marxist-Leninist and Maoists ` named terms are possible in Indian politics then why can ` t the Ambedkar ideology be added in it.
The dilemma of Ambedkarite ` s cultural splendor and political handicap is minutely presented in the film.
It is a rare thing of Indian cine-world.
Keeping apart the exceptions, he does n ` t seem to be publishing or showing anything against the producers with which they might get angry.
The industry has also set the limitations of criticism and the violation means inviting many kinds of dangers.
It does n ` t take time to exclude a journalist or a media organisation and make it bend on its knees.
From one side the rowdiness of film industry on media has persisted.
There are many aspects of the rowdiness, one of them is undeclared censorship and other is self-alleged censorship.
This is the ugly truth today that film industry controls the media for certain information.
