Fashion is blooming in Puja Pandals.
Someone is having tattoo signs at their arms while others are wearing trendy jewelry.
Durga Puja is an occasion when the ceremony of `` muh dikhai `` is being carried in these Puja Pandals.
Altogether it is the time of just fun and enjoyment.
Girls want to look somewhat special in this festive season also.
Simi Kazmi, the owner of Kazmi boutique located at Madan mohan malwiya street says that she is giving the priority to red color because of festivals and parties.
Everybody gets pulled towards this color.
In the recent times even the celebrities have liked it and the big brands have been fond of the color red ranging from saris to shoes.
Azeem from Designer works, Sadatganj says that yellow dresses are significant during festivals and religious programs.
Riya, a student of Gomtinagar is fully enjoying Puja in a park situated near tank.
She says that even western dresses are being given a festive touch.
The volunteer of the Puja Pandal says that the custom of `` Muh dikhai `` is also frequent these days.
The boy and girl see each other and confirm their selection in the Puja pavilion.
It is believed that the relationships that are fixed in pavilion stay for lifetime.
The goddess ` s statue in Gomtinagar public Puja committee(around 16 feet tall) is especially a center of attraction.
Along with goddess Durga, devotees see the idols of Kartikeya, Ganesha, Laxmi and Saraswati.
The statue built here is chosen for the first prize for the last three years.
Devotees gathering in temples during religious occasions is a common thing.
But a little mistake or carelessness can be fatal for the devotees.
Last year it was because of the carelessness of Police and administrative officers that several devotees were hurt due to stampede at Panki temple and Barah Devi temple.
This time the administration is not in a mood to take any risk.
Special arrangements have been made for security in the temples.
Separate barricades have been put for sight at entry and exist points.
CCTV cameras have also been installed to keep eye at the criminals.
Policemen standing in civil dress will stop incidents related to eve teasing.
ACM-1 Yogendra Kumar said that this time the length of barricades have been increased.
Only 200 devotees are allowed to enter Barahi Devi temple at a time to avoid stampede.
ADM city Avinash singh said that special arrangements have been made for the safety of women at Tapeshwari temple.
In Vaibhav Laxmi temple also the devotees will be allowed to enter through queue by putting barricades.
The magistrates have been put on duty as per the crowd entering into the temples.
Two magistrates each will be on duty in Barah Devi , Tapeshwari Devi, chinnamasta Devi, Kali mathiya, Bangali Mohal and Chandrika Devi temple.
According to Dharmsindhu Navratri begins from Suryodaya Vyapini Pratipada.
According to Pt. Aditya Pandey, Chaitra Navratri will begin from Shukla Paksha Pratipada of chaitra month which is 11th April 2013.
Anup Kapoor the priest of Vaibhav Laxmi temple said that this time a seamless lamp weighing 251 kilograms would be lit in the temple.
Food will be distributed on 19th April.
This day around one million devotees distribute food to the people from morning till night.
Goddess ` s Arti is held twice a day during Navratris and seeing the huge crowd of devotees the doors of the temple remain closed only for a maximum of 0.5-45 hrs.
Television, mobile, laptop and all such gadgets have reduced the craze of Ramleela among city people.
Until few decades audiences used to surround the stage a couple of hours before the staging of Ramleela.
Later the artists who played characters in Ramleela used to come.
But today the lord reaches the Ramleela venue early and the devotees later arrive at his call.
As a result the percentage of people enjoying Ramleela has reduced to hundreds from thousands.
Today ` s youth isn ` t much interested in Ramleela.
Santram sharma, the president of Shri adarsh Ramleela Committee says that this year his committee is celebrating 48th Ramleela ceremony.
during 80s and 90s decade when Ramleela was staged in the city then there was no space around the stage even to keep a feet.
People used to come and sit with their families from 6 PM onward while during those times arrangements were made to sit on the floor by putting carpets.
But these days only 5-7 thousand people reach Ramleela venue everyday to enjoy Ramleela.
He believes that television serials have reduced people ` s interest towards Ramleela.
Arjun sonkar who plays the character of lord Rama in Shri Durga Ramleela Committee says that he is associated with Ramleela for the past 16 years.
Earlier there was a lot of craze among people regarding Ramleela.
That is why Ramleela site remained housefull and many a times lord had to arrive early on the call of devotees.
But the devotees turn towards the Ramleela spot only after hearing the voice of arti.
King Dashrath in the anguish of his son lord Rama ` s separation finally abandoned life.
The entire Ayodhya mourned when they got the news of King Dashrath ` s demise.
The grief of Rama ` s separation had not ended and all of a sudden the incident of king ` s demise lamented the Ayodhya residents.
On Wednesday the episode of king Dashrath ` s life renunciation was staged in Patharchatti Ramleela committee.
Earlier the welcoming of lord Rama, who had marched from Ayodhya by Nishadraj was staged.
Where the audiences became emotional after watching the sight of Lord Rama, Sita and Laxman ` s crossing of Ganges on boat with the help of Nishadraj.
The context of surpanakha ` s nose cutting was staged in Panchwati on Wednesday by Pajawa Ramleela committee.
While in Ayodhya the story of Bharat ` s mourning after father ` s death on seeing his mothers as widows was staged.
The departure of lord Rama to forest was eloquently staged by Shrikatra Ramleela committee.
Later the dialogue between Kewat and lord Rama was beautifully presented.
Marich ` s killing, Hanuman ` s appearence and the friendship of lord Rama, sugreeva was beautifully staged in Alopebagh leela ground by shridaraganj Ramleela committee.
These were the moments for which people weighted for the entire year.
Spectators became emotional when they saw Rama and Bharata hugging each other after 14 years of banishment.
The scene of Bharat reunion was staged with a fanfare and emotion at Loknath square of Tuesday night city.
The Patharchatti Ramleela committee which organized this program left no stone unturned in making it better.
Bharat and Shatrughan were sitting at the beautiful seat of the galley when lord Rama reached the silver seat with Laxman and sita.
The Bharat reunion festival of Patharchatti Ramleela committee does not need any introduction.
The procession of Rama and Bharata came out from the Ramabhavan square of the city on Tuesday night at eight o ` clock with full spirit.
Thousands of devotees who were already enjoying the musical evening were waiting for theses moments.
The chief minister of the committee Anand Singh says that two new stages have been prepared to give a new touch to the Bharat reunion this time.
He says that Ramleela is being held by the committee since hundreds of years.
Few years back a party from Jabalpur had rated the price of a studded stage to be 1.5 billion rupees.
Which was refused to be sold.
Further the committee also has chair worth millions of rupees on which lord Rama ` s procession is carried.
It is said that earlier Ramleela was organized in the firelight by Ramanuja community in Sudarshana bhawan of the city.
During this time when the Mughal emperor Akbar crossed that place, he saw that thousands of people are being sentimental seeing the parting of mother sita.
He could not resist it and he himself lifted the chair of Sita.
He has provided a land for the ceremony near DRM office on the demand of the people.
But later the British officers handed over this land to railways and provided a new land to the committee in Rambagh area.
Currently this Patharchatti Ramleela committee stages Ramleela for ten days.
The committee had first started creating the characters of Ramleela at the level of lord Shrikrishnagami rasik community.
The Ramleela of shri katra committee ended on Monday with triveni pujan, hawan and bhandara.
Meanwhile lord Rama reached Sangam coast on a chariot with Sita, Laxman and Hanuman from Bharadwaj aashram.
He did triveni puja and distributed prasada among the devotees.
Earlier a symbolical killing of Ravana by Rama was done on sunday.
Meanwhile there was great excitement among the people to see the 25 feet Ravana statue built by the committee.
Chaitram who belongs to Chattisgarh and has worked in the troop of popular theater artist Habib Tanveer and devoted 40 years to arts now lacks even the basic facilities.
He is compelled to earn bread for hi family by grazing cattle in the village.
Chaitram has not only shown the magic of acting at national level but also in abroad.
Nacha artist Chaitram Yadav has received the treasure of acting from the culture of his father senior theater artist and Nacha actor late Bhulwaram Yadav as a tradition.
Chaitram who grew up seeing his father ` s presentations left his primary education because of his interest and aligned with Nacha from just three years of age.
He started presenting Nacha at the age of 15 years and roamed around the entire state and presented with his troop.
Popular theater artist of the country Habib Tanveer organized a workshop in 1976 in sector-6, Bhilai where all the artists of Nacha parties of the entire state participated.
The purpose of the workshop was to choose the best artists and give them recognition at national level.
Habeeb Tanveer was influenced by the acting skills of chaitram.
He selected chaitram for his team `` Naya Theater `` .
His two assistants were also chosen.
Chaitram ` s father Bhulwaram was already associated with Naya Theater and was busy presenting at national level.
While the Naya Theater by Chaitram Yadav and his team of talented youngsters was growing well.
Chaitram played the lead role in Habib Tanveer ` s popular plays, ` Charandas chor ` , ` Gaon ke nam ` , ` Sasural mor ` , ` Nam damaad ` , ` Mitti ki gadi ` and ` Agra bazar ` .
There came a time when both father and son acted in a single drama and received appreciation.
That time was also very special from theater and art perspective.
Then Habib ` s sahib ` s plays were not only liked in the country but in abroad also.
Chaitram presented his plays in a colloquial chattisgarhi seeing which the audiences became spell bound.
His mesmerizing presentations at state level became popular in foreign countries also.
The newly built state Chattisgarh also started getting recognition when the plays made in Chattisgarhi dialect were staged in foreign countries.
Chaitram had never imagined that he will get so much honor and prestige by the successful presentations of plays.
He used to get monthly salary for expenses from the Naya Theater but this amount was spent before time as he lived in Delhi.
But Chaitram ignored the needs of his family and continued his dedication towards arts and acting.
Thus time passed away, the children grew up and then he came back to his village two years before his children ` s wedding to play the duty of a father.
Chaitram spent all the money in his children ` s wedding that he had earned by devoting himself to arts and acting for 40 years.
Chaitram is now trying to build a new troop by taking economic assistance from Sanskrit department to give opportunity to new artists and to save the extincting culture of the state.
He did not get any help from the Sanskrit department office despite going there several times.
They approached the cultural minister for help but they were disappointed there also.
Consequently the artist who has shown the talent of his acting in foreign is compelled to nurture his family by grazing cattle in the village.
Cultural minister Brijmohan Agrawal joined the last rituals of Chaitram ` s father , Bhulwaram when he died in the year 2005.
He had made an announcement among the villagers that Muktakashi stage would be built in the village in the memory of Bhulwaram Yadav so that he remains alive in the heart of the artists forever.
Even after eights years the stage has not been built.
There is a lot of anger among the villagers towards the representatives and officers as the stage has not been built.
Unique union of artists from the country and abroad can be seen in the 27th international surajkund fair.
Folk art is being enjoyed and the visitors are submerged in musical tunes.
Song-music, dance and several presentations were magnificent.
This fair has the traditional touch of every country.
Further the handicraft art of entire world is also the major attraction of this fair.
People from Delhi, western Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan and Haryana are coming to see this fair.
Kolharpuri shoes and footwear are posing threat to the fast growing market of Rajasthani shoes, Lahga choli.
Everywhere something different could be seen.
Not only this Kashmiri shawls have been brought from Jammu & Kashmir and decorative items made of shells from Kanyakumari.
While there are silk saris from Karnataka, wooden items from Madhya Pradesh are also there.
From West Bengal and Odisha to Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh, handicraft artists from almost all the states have come here to sell their creations.
While the elephant-horses dance, puppet dance are attracting people , they are also liking the masks of Sri lanka and funky looks of Thiland.
The special thing is that the attractive tunes of folk music would give a unique feel to your ears.
A 1200 year old royal shrine has been discovered during an excavation in Peru ` s Lembeyek region.
It has been said that they are related to the rulers of former Inka-Sikn civilization.
Carlos Elera, the director of Los Ventas achaelogical department excavating the region said that apart from them, a chariot, things used during funeral, crown, mask and several objects have been discovered.
A pendent has also been found which was worn by the high class people during the then civilization.
Elera told that the excavation is ongoing and the series of discovering objects is still going on.
It is the first shrine to be found at Los Ventas region and a symbol where a person is sitting on bier for funeral is found for the second time.
Elora told that the bier decorated in ancient Peruvian culture was considered to be the symbol of affluence amongst the nobility.
It continued till 16th century.
They demonstrated their power and prestige with this.
But later when the Spanish rulers tried to invest here they prohibited them.
Turkey has appointed a cook of Indian origin in Malaysia as its brand ambassador to promote its culture and culinary style.
After becoming the brand ambassador supaiyya said that he will display different culinary styles of cooking and combine the food items of both the countries and prepare a single food item.
according to the newspaper ` The star ` , in an official statement issue by the embassy it has been said that `` Supayya will also provide information to the Turkish people regarding Malaysia `` .
In the statement it has been said that the number of people coming to Turkey from Malaysia is continuously increasing.
Last year 20,000 tourists reached Turkey.
Social scientist Ashish Nandy who gave a controversial statement against the Dalits has said that my statement has been misinterpreted, if anybody finds it wrong then I am even ready to go to the jail.
He has also denied that he has received any summon from the Rajasthan Police.
Recently during the Jaipur literary festival he had said that majority of the corrupt people belong to Dalit and backward castes.
He said that I have been working for the Dalits and tribals for the past 45 years and I support them.
Under I.P.C ACT 506, an FIR has been lodged against him after the anti Dalit statements given by him in a literary festival.
Later he has said that he did not intend to hurt anybody.
Dalits under the banner ` bahujan society struggle committee ` are opposing his controversial statement.
Loksabha Speaker Meera Kumar on this statement has aid that caste system is like slavery.
The slaves might be freed for sometime but Dalits always have to face difficulties.
It is a derogatory statement.
Kajol came to know about the theft when she was getting ready for Karwachauth Puja and she could not not find the gold bangles to wear.
She saw that everything in the wardrobe was in chaotic manner, things were scattered, jewelry box was open and the bangles were stolen.
Out of which her gold bangles were also stolen whose value is said to be five million rupees.
Kajol and Ajay have lodged an FIR in Juhu Police station.
The Police is interrogating the servants working at Kajol ` s residence.
Although it was not the first time that theft has occurred at Kajol & Ajay ` s residence. Last year in 2008 also a similar incident had come up.
During then also objects worth millions were stolen and that theft was carried by a servant working at Kajol ` s residence who was arrested by Chattisgarh Police.
He was suspected because he was absconding after theft.
Today Hema is 64 years old.
Hema and dharam Jee ` s relationship is successfully progressing even today.
Hema has fulfilled all her responsibilities while dharam has tried every possible effort to be a good father and a good husband in which he has succeeded also.
Although there was a lot of fuss in the parliament regarding her Islam religion because of which Dharmendra had to lose his membership.
You took good care of your skin during scorching heat.
The climate has changed and you have become careless towards your skin.
We should tell you that rainy season is also harmful for the skin.
Stickiness, humidity, sweat appears on the skin immediately after rains.
during this season contagious diseases spread due to uncleanliness and fungal infections erupt.
Majority of the fungal skin infections erupt during this season.
If they are not treated within time then the situation might become serious.
Not only this if the face is not cleaned properly then sweat and humidity forms a layer at the skin.
Consequently the accumulated dirt on the skin leads to acne.
Not only this this infection can also infect the feet during this season.
The best way to get rid of them is regular cleanliness and dryness.
Monsoon means lifeless skin with oily looks.
Skin cleansing is important in order to maintain a glow on the skin during this season.
Whenever you come home from outside clean your face using a face wash otherwise carelessness might lead to skin infection.
Use face scrub twice a week.
It will give you freedom from dead cells and the skin will breath easily.
Tone your skin after cleaning it.
Toner prepares a base for skin ` s moisturizing so that the skin can breathe easily.
People with oily skin should moisturize their skin only twice a day.
If your feet gets drenched in water them wash them with clean water immediately you reach home.
Don ` t forget to mix antiseptic liquid in water.
Feet start losing their moisture by frequent contact with water during rainy season.
Always apply moisturizer on feet along with body after bathing.
If there are any kinds of wounds in your feet then avoid going in rain.
The danger of bacterial infection might increase by coming into contact with water.
Always keep an antiseptic gel in your purse during rain and apply them on your hands and feet after every hour so that there isn ` t any danger of infection.
Antiseptic gel should also be applied on the feet before sleeping at night.
It will keep the feet safe from fungal and bacterial infection.
Make-ups get washed away with rains.
But you can apply make-up during monsoon without any tension if you are aware of the right way of applying make-up.
Avoid bright lip shades during day.
The lip liner to outline the lipstick should also be water proof.
Habib ahmad( the co-ordinator of Habibs) says that hairs need special care during this season.
The reason is danger of fungal and bacterial infection during the season due to humidity.
Dissolve shampoo in water and massage the hair roots using hands.
It will enhance blood circulation and it will also reduce the skin infection that occurs in skull.
Apply oil on your scalp once a week.
Don ` t apply oil on your hair but on your scalp.
It should be noted that too much oiling during this season might increase dandruff problems.
Do not leave the oil in hair for more than 1.5 hour during this season.
Use olive or sesame oil.
Use products with natural elements as far as possible.
Shine your dull and lifeless hair by using serum.
The head skin starts itching if the wet hairs are tied for too long which is known as Pediculosis.
In order to avoid it, shampoo your hair after getting wet in rains and let them dry properly so that is no trouble.
Take vitamin -E rich diet for the shine, strength and growth of hair.
Neck length cut troubles during this season.
Keep such a cut which doesn ` t requires maintenance.
Dry your hair properly with towel after washing and untangle them using a broad brush.
Tie your hair only after drying.
Certainly wash your hair after getting wet in rain.
In order to give natural care to your hair, soak fresh or dry marigold flowers in warm water.
Drain this water and wash your hair with it or soak fenugreek seeds in water overnight.
Drain it in the morning and wash your hair with this water.
Apart from giving shine to the hair it also ends all kinds of hair problems.
Include vitamin E, C, iron and calcium for having healthy hair.
Include raw fruits, vegetables, sprouts, salad etc. in the diet.
Drink 8-10 glasses of water in a day.
You don ` t need to search for external facilities, the things present in the kitchen are enough to bring back your lost glow.
Their usefulness increases during rainy season because turmeric works as an antiseptic and saves the skin from external fungal infection.
Put a little bit of sandalwood powder, a pinch of turmeric and milk in the bowl.
Apply it on the face and leave it for ten-fifteen minutes.
You can use this sandalwood powder pack for scrubbing your body.
You can also apply this pack on the entire body and leave for few minutes.
You will yourself notice the glow you had wished for within ten-fifteen days.
Mix a little bit of multani clay in this pack if your skin is oily.
Use milk instead of water if your skin is dry.
Have curd in your diet or use it in the form of beauty pack, it is beneficial in all the forms.
Curd is a natural cleanser and toner.
Put a pinch of turmeric and gram flour in two spoonfuls of curd before bathing.
Apply it on face and massage for 5-10 mins, then wash the face with clean water.
If you want to use it as body pack then use oat flour instead of gram flour.
Seasonal fruits and vegetables also contain extraordinary beauty elements.
The pulp of seasonal fruits such as apricot, cucumber, papaya should be used as face packs.
Olive oil, coconut oil and mustard oil should be warmed a little and this oil should be massaged on the entire body. It not only strengthens the bones and muscles but the toxic elements present in the body also come out in the form of sweat.
Oil massage has a special significance in Kerala Ayurvedic medical method.
Recently a fashion show named `` Aaj ki Dilli-3 `` was organized by DFFP in Bulbul hotel in Delhi.
The objective of the show was to encourage young talents in fashion show and provide them a platform to show their talent.
The winners were crowned as models.
For the first time we had met on the sets of ` swayamvar ` .
Rahul knew me before this but I did not know him.
when I got the chance to go alone with Rahul.
When only three girls were left at the end and when I introduced them to my family, we felt that Dimpy is the right choice.
Before coming to the swayamwar I had told my family that it is Rahul Mahajan ` s swayamvar and if he selects me, I ` ll marry him.
Even I told my mother that I ` ll marry one of these girls.
But the final decision would be yours on whom should I marry.
Mom liked Dimpy.
Every girl dreams of her wedding.
Irrespective of the kind of wedding.
The relationship that brings them together is similar in all the weddings.
That is why the kind of weddings do not matter.
The only difference is that common weddings are seen by few people and our weddings could be seen by thousands of people.
Although we have a cook but I would myself like to cook for Rahul.
That is why I learnt cooking from Rahul ` s mother.
The special thing about Dimpy is that she quickly admires the things.
Our customs,rituals and food habits are totally different. Dimply understood our culture very soon.
Whenever I visit Kolkata I adopt Bengali customs and rituals.
I love being Bengali son-in-law.
My mother says that now I have become more responsible.
There is no loneliness at home.
The feeling of the presence of someone around you every moment is unique.
After marriage I was attentive towards taking responsibility of the family.
For this reason I remained away from work for a long time.
Now when the family is okay I am working a little.
I will do whatever I can do for it.
There was nothing like breaking the relationship.
You can call it my immaturity that I lost patience.
But now everything is alright and we are happy with each other.
You need time to understand each other and every relationship becomes strong with time.
Today our relationship has also become stronger undergoing several difficulties.
That was a bad phase which has passed.
Today our bonding has become stronger after that fight.
All the ups and downs of the life should be faced together.
Every journey becomes easy when the companion is with you.
You should understand the feelings of your companion and take important decisions of the life together.
The pillars of a happy life can only be put by doing this.
Doing make-up in such a situation is an old thing.
We spoke to several working women on this matter.
The solution to your problem is long stay make-up.
Doing long stay make-up in everyday in parlor is not possible.
But with stay on make-up it is possible for the make-up to last for 1-5 hours.
First of all apply glow moisturizer on skin.
Then apply a foundation matching your skin tone.
Apply concealer around the eyes and on the face to hide dark circles and skin blemishes.
It will make the skin even.
Use darker shades of lipstick at night and lighter shades during day.
It will give a different look to your personality.
Till 19th century the tradition of Indian painting art developed in various forms through the medium of valid art styles.
The glamour of foreign rule and new struggle made us stranger to all our things.
They repeated the foreign artistic methods of expression along with research on foreign painting.
Yet their efforts signified the advent of new genre.
The flow of Indian arts always proceeded on new path.
First great arts teacher who imbibed the meaning of new era.
Acharya Ravindra nath Thakur freed art from foreign grip and nurtured it with the new meaning of life.
He was born in such a family which was modern despite nurturing the ancient cultural traditions of India.
A group of few talented artists from Bengal devoted themselves to the serious learning of Indian arts under the supervision of Ravindra Nath Thakur.
Arts had adopted a certain direction by this time but totality and maturity in expression was yet to be achieved.
It was not easy to get rid of foreign slavery and it was apparent in one form or another.
Nandlal Basu proved to be a great creater at this juncture.
Their was a lively consciousness in his creation and it contained a strong feel of culture building.
There is a power in his art which provides energy to the lively optimistic voice.
Several co artists who have worked with Nandlal Basu have given a substantive contribution to Indian arts.
Gagendra Nath Thakur always adopted the art trends of new era in its original form.
Formerly artists had vision.
He engaged himself in the feeling of beauty and wonder by making anonymous dreams a reality.
But today the artists analyze the situation.
Material conflicts have aroused dissatisfaction in them.
The internal conflicts have shaken its inner core as per the complexities of the problems.
Their different shapes are obsessed with external and internal strokes of pull.
Yet the western feel has overwhelmed the arts consciousness of this place.
The artists are still hopefully looking towards the west.
some say that art has become ugly.
Ancient proprieties have become loose while becoming ` modern ` .
but it does not mean that such lines are always meaningless.
If the artist has self determination and full faith in visions then whatever he will draw with his brush will definitely attract the viewers.
That is beyond my understanding.
The terrorism today has aroused a peculiar kind of ` ego ` among the artists.
Adverse conditions have distorted life.
Today Human has become fed up of that.
Sorrows have made him sensible to such an extent that he doesn ` t expects pleasure in every object but affectionate research.
The philosophy of life today is obsessed with conflicted materialism.
Today severe pensive environment surround the ancient spiritual philosophy and medieval age fantasy splendor.
The new trend of pictorial illustration is also seen in the modern artists.
The glimpses of nature was rarely sketched during ancient times but today the capacity of drawing natural images has increased.
Bendre, Vishwanath Mukherjee and Gopal Ghosh have drawn the natural beauty of India in his own style by being away from western influence.
Experimental elements have become dominant in current art of painting.
Every artist is adopting different ways of his own different technique, different style and painting.
Several enthusiastic artists have broken chronic series.
Quittance has become the test of their art.
Real art is the circulating force the world.
It connects all the people in a thread of unity.
The art which is used at the level of true realization shall only pass.
They might be natural but not pretentious.
The sharp eyes of a new artist energized by the new development cannot remain static on a single fact even if tries to cover everything.
They are trying to get rid of tradition and present new formulas.
He has become conscious to include new experiments and inspirations everyday.
He might be devoid of pictorial capacity but he is eager to explore and achieve something ` new ` .
A feeling of dissatisfaction and restlessness is constantly pushing him ahead.
One cannot deny that establishing arts suddenly on a new platform is a valid demand at this point of time.
Certainly permissiveness points towards the development condition but many a times doesn ` t becomes the impetus of artists intellectual faith and remains limited to experimentation.
If the new achievements of arts are evaluated then several external and internal effects are visualized at extreme levels.
The common complaint about ` modern art ` is that distorted lines are not understood.
Some have no heads and others no feet. Is this an art?
Whether you hang the picture as it is or upside down, it looks the same.
They are away from clumsy, unscientific and specifics of human science.
Abstract art which is also known as `` arupwadi kala `` has become a trend today and several experimentations are carried there.
Unimaginable, unseen, peculiar shapes whose structure, pattern and designs do not match the original object.
This chauvinism of free creation is such that they do not understand where the sources of arts are scattered and where they break and connect.
Everything is tangled, random and derailed.
The expansion of colors and lines are disproportionate, somewhere the lines are so prominent that colors are not visible and somewhere the lines have become invisible because of excess colors.
New vision and techniques have brought revolution in art forms.
The feelings of an artist cannot be bound in circles.
Sometimes the possibilities are totally different in highly unpredictable manner and they are shown in a different way.
The creators change several paths to catch their longing and aspirated dreams.
The ruthless wind either vanishes into the memory or empowers the creation ability through its hard work.
Repressed complexes, worries and the inner disturbances have shaken the feeling of prosperity and beauty.
Every picture is drawn in such a manner that its association with tradition is disconnected to a large extent.
New refers to deviation from the tradition, pioneer, extremely modern and at the same time amazing, unique and stunning.
Certainly the new moment is intriguing and attractive but it won ` t last for long.
It seems as if the warmth of feeling has become meaningless ans blank.
But yes the art today has its own significance.
Several units have provided it new names and contexts.
Consequently his every creation presents a synthesis in a elementary form.
Yet undoubtedly complex and stagnant art has become active.
Does anyone have monopoly over Sanatan faiths?
He has understood and evaluated the helplessness and conflict of social situation with open eyes and open brain.
The fertile land which is required for the development of arts was not available during the time when Raja Ravi Verma came up.
The beautiful coordinating help of brain and heart, mind and feeling is the only specialty of an able artist.
Identifying the object as per the country and age is the only test of creation.
He was born in 1848 in a village called Kilimanur around 20 miles away from Kottayam town in middle Kerela.
He had close relationship with the royal family of Travankor.
He was very keen to draw pictures since childhood.
His uncle Rajraj Verma was once filling colors after drawing lord Vishnu ` s picture.
Meanwhile he went out for some work.
During this time boy Ravi suddenly reached there.
When he saw the incomplete picture then out of child curiosity he immediately sat to complete the picture.
Further he also drew the picture of Garud along with Vishnu.
His uncle was quietly observing all these activities.
He was overwhelmed by seeing the dedication of the boy.
He became happy and blessed me- `` son, you will be a great artist in the future.
His uncle used to draw pictures on tandhor method.
Consequently it seriously impacted the development of his artistic interests.
He left significant mark on the creations of Alagri Naidu and Theodor Jenson who had come to India for travel purpose.
Alagri Naidu was a painter from Mathura who drew pictures on European method.
Thiodor Jenson was a portrait painter and his portraits were exactly build on western style.
Jenson refused to make him his disciple seeing his original brain and a different style of work. He only used to see him working from a distance.
But he came closer to Alagri Naidu and considered him his teacher.
Since western pictures was drawn in majority during that time due to English power, he was also inclined towards that.
He drew pictures of gods and goddesses by taking ancient and religious subjects.
His style of working was western many a times but the predicable subject used to be Indian.
When anyone finds the origin of his faith then his energy flows towards that.
He got a path in the purity of gods and goddesses and he evaluated these images with a dedication.
Suddenly the demand for his pictures increased and it became impossible to fulfill them.
The Diwan of Baroda requested to get the oil paintings of his significant pictures in Europe.
His pictures were liked among kings, affluent and gentle class.
They used to buy them giving high prices and decorate their palaces.
When the price of wales came to Trivendrum in 1875 then the king of Trivendrum presented him his pictures.
His paintings became popular worldwide in Pune ` s art exhibition, 1880 and Viana and chicago ` s exhibitions of 1892.
`` Dakshin Bharat ke Gypsi `` is an unparalleled creation built on the expressionist method.
Despite making religion his goal, he was neither conservative nor staunch religious blind.
There has been no major aspect of present art stream which has not been initiated by this art devotee.
The original motivation of Awani babu was so strong that it has led to dispute between western and eastern art forms.
When foreign slavery had injured the soul of Indian arts he courageously led it.
He not only brought out the still, lifeless art treasure of India from downfall but gave a new culture and filled it with depth and beauty.
He appreciated western art technique but he could not imbibe it.
He has himself written, `` he used to collect all the beautiful faces that jodasa used to see in the building.
During childhood he received the training of painting from his brother Gagendra Thakur and uncle Ravindranath Thakur.
He writes- `` One day Ravi uncle came to my art gallery and ordered me to draw a picture.
` chitrangda ` was recently written during that time.
`` chitrangda `` was published with his image.
Undoubtedly we laugh by seeing those pictures today but it was the first sign of my love for arts with Ravi uncle.
Since then till today I have worked several times with Ravi uncle in this direction.
It was his motivation in whatever I could do until today.
It was his firm belief that art is an object of inner self.
It is inner motivation which awakens the expressive and creative talent.
Where there is no self belief nothing can happen with outer show off.
The subtlety of conscience was so imbibed in his personality that understood and tested this in himself and his students.
Nandlal drew a big painting named `` Uma ki tapasya `` .
Uma is praying for lord Shiva standing on a hill.
There is a thin line of moon behind his head.
No colors were used in the painting.
There was a feel of wheatish color in the entire painting.
He hasn ` t used any colors in this painting.
Something happens in the heart while looking it.
Why did I say this much to Nandlal?
Possibly he would have looked at this form Uma where she is firm like a stone.
She has lost all her beauty and complexion while doing tough austerity.
Then how could she apply sandal?
One didn ` t feel sleepy that night.
I rushed to Nandlal early morning.
When I reached there I saw Nandlal sitting in front of the painting and thinking before moving the brush on it.
Your Uma is right.
Now there is no need to make any changes in that.
Since then I have become more alert and understood that paintings are ones own creation.
The self motivation of Avani Babu was so sublime that despite being in the motivation of several people he had reached a great level beyond the reach of common man.
His occupant mind has become detached with creative activity.
He erased those paintings many a times which he used to brush for hours.
He used to say if there is any error left on the painting then a new one should be made.
He used to embrace everything in a basic form.
He even used to welcome those who were not his own with cognate spirit.
Avani Babu looked at various aspects of art with full power and adopted a harmonious path.
He did not want to captivate creativity in a single country or in a narrow circumference.
Realization and faith are achieved through meditation and only serious meditation leads to real achievement of arts.
The light and dark strokes of his paintings contain love, attraction, devotion, affectionand planetary or non-planetary alluring feel.
While at one hand he had the consciousness of a legendary artist and great creator on the other hand the coordination and dedication of a devotee.
His humanity and coordinating instinct was expressed so well in those paintings that they were incarnated at many levels of life.
The perception of his soul had become so sharp that it didn ` t get loosened despite his prolonged meditation.
His style of art was opposed for a long time and he also had to face negligence in his life.
He made masks of several animals using bamboo bale and tree stump.
He expressed a different animation in extremely simple toys made of soil which later became new experiments.
He initiated a new era by arousing the art consciousness of the country.
Not being inspired by the revolutionary feel of old traditional matrix of Indian arts but he gave patronage to the rising power in order to energize arts as a disciplined creator.
He already had the innate urge for creativity and moreover wealth, prosperity and happiness allowed him to play with brush and colors.
He expressed his feelings and the peculiar waves of his mind with mysterious colors.
Though his paintings did not have any certain scheme but we cannot just consider his creativity to be an amusement of the rich.
He wanted move further the western technique and stream of arts with his ancient and well known way.
Impressionism and Cubism were quite popular in Europe during those days.
Cubic artists believe that the flat surface on which they draw pictures is two sided.
Therefore the shapes, objects and pictures drawn on them should be two sided instead of three sided.
Opposite to this impressionist artists consider the use of light colors essential for producing effectiveness in the surrounding.
All of them were French artists and they influenced the art of major countries through their new style.
Gagendra Nath Thakur got attracted to these western art-forms.
This dark and light beauty painted at the canvas mesmerizes the soul.
But the meaningful stateliness of their art does not carry jinx.
The artistic skills in western deep paintings is desirable till the time they are helpful in creating the according environment.
Generally their power centers so much in putting up the images and their situation that they do not put special attention on external appearance and beauty.
Even the paintings of great artists like Matisse and Picasso many a times seem to be poor and unattractive on these parameters.
His every painting contains the light of energy and excitement of creativity that stillness and sorrow seem to remain absent from them.
His mysterious nature becomes alive and seem too be laughing even in paintings on `` death `` .
Gagendra Nath thakur was fond of excessive painting.
In the beginning Japanese paintings inspired him.
The influence of Kakuji akakura is visible in his primary art forms.
The color constitution and the artistic show of light and dark in the painting titled `` Indian crows `` is almost similar.
His rarely drawn paintings on ancient subjects and imaginary sagas are also very beautiful.
`` Shree chaitanya ` s Bhakti vihwal kirtan while bidding adieu to his mother `` and several other paintings depict the charming poses of this saint.
The moon light is multiplying the brightness of Shree Chaitanya ` s face in such a way as if his soul is giving a message of immortal peace.
In the painting `` An evening in Ranchi `` , indigenous beauty and the happiness of village life in India is divinely shown.
Gagan Babu was an experimenter and there was a deep intellectual insight in his new experiments and tests.
Apart from paintings he also drew shapes and image paintings.
He has drawn beautiful images of global poet Tagore and Sir J,C. Bose.
He has also drawn sarcastic paintings which carry acute meaning and a sharpness that goes through the heart.
Sarcastic paintings of ` the power of law ` have become quite successful.
He has also drawn the beauty, dignity and serenity of Himalayas.
He was the elder brother of Avandrinath Thakur.
He gave precious contribution to arts till seventy one years of age.
His paintings were exhibited in Berlin and Hamburg.
He was quite appreciated by the foreign art experts for his successful paintings on impressionism.
His paintings were supported in 1914 in Paris,in 1927 in America and in 1934 in London and thus he became world famous.
The establishment of `` the Indian society of oriental art `` was the result of his invincible inspiration.
After Avnindra Nath thakur nobody in that generation was as popular artist as Nandlal Basu that India could receive as a treasure.
The contribution that he gave to the progress of arts is an object of greatness and pride.
He could only be caught on the infinite path of devotion through great difficulty.
The personal gust, ambition and culture of an artist is everything for him.
The steadiness of personal achievements has taken an impersonal form.
While creating the artists goes beyond his personality and his subject also reaches emotional touch from an impulsive form.
Until the last phase of 19th century the expansion of modern Indian arts was not much comprehensive.
Thought he artists were moving ahead with new point of view and were free from foreign influences to a certain extent, yet arts still did not have a certain path.
Nand Babu gave an unprecedented contribution in launching and organizing the modern arts through his versatile talent.
In `` Jodasakor ghare `` Avanindra Nath thakur in an extremely interesting way himself has explained how two great artists unexpectedly meet each other.
After few days an engraving student named Satyen Batwal brought a boy to his home.
After coming he started saying-: `` You will have to admit him to your class `` .
I seriously looked up- there stood a small boy of dark complexion.
I asked him `` do you know reading and writing `` ?
He said - I have passed matriculation.
I said- `` let me see your work `` .
He showed me a painting.
A girl, a deer, an emerging twig, trees and plants. He had drawn Shakuntala.
Come tomorrow with a painting of lord Ganesha, who bestows prosperity.
A flag was fixed on a wood and a painting of lord Ganesha was drawn on that.
Beautiful pictures were drawn with an ambiance of early morning sun.
He refined the pattern of `` Bengal art `` which was established by avanindra nath Thakur .
He was inspired directly by the paintings of Ajanta and tiger caves.
He went to Ajanta with his classmate Asit Kumar Haldar and surveyed the tiger caves of Gwalior state after returning from there.
In 1922 Ravindra Nath Thakur brought Nandbabu as the chairman of `` Art-House `` , Shantiniketan.
Two years later when Ravindra Nath thakur went to china he also took him along.
Several beautiful paintings were derived from the mysterious inspirational imagination reminiscing the pride of forgotten past.
He had an amazing capacity of catching and evaluating the subtle.
It took the form of withdrawn shapes of the soul not the splendor of bright colors.
According to him, an artist has the same stream as that of a devotee.
Both of them walk their path and reach a sheer bliss.
Secondly an artist can meditate through his art-skills without even fasting or observing festivals.
Nandbabu was the lover of artistic totality in creation.
He imbibed various aspects of life and their meanings in order to raise the level of his interest in arts.
Undoubtedly Nand Babu never believed in failure.
He is the real creator whose curiosity does not end even after knowing the mystery and who does not disrupt his meditation even before the denuded truth.
There is no creativity where the truth changes or becomes false, there might exist newness.
Nand Babu wasn ` t bound in the limit of his `` self `` . His creations reflect his broad heart and vast emotions.
He was the central majesty of the Indian artists of this era.
Whatever he drew that became the immortal norm of arts.
After achieving the edge of dedication his humanity started being represented in his paintings.
Initially he was inspired by the Indian spiritualism but later he became associated in proving the significance of cultural confluence.
He bound the history and the future in a strong syncretic thread of creativity.
Nand Babu had drawn more than one thousand paintings.
His early creations were influenced by Ajanta and tiger caves, he was also a strong supporter of Hindu `` Devvad `` .
He also drew line sketches and expressed extremely tender and subtle emotions through lines.
Lines have become alive in several line paintings like `` Veenavadini `` , `` Nateer Puja `` etc.
Undoubtedly the grief of lines and colors seem to be overshadowing the entire environment.
At some places the life touching colors of dawn are prominent and at other places the passionate feelings are expressed through interesting views of nature.
The working areas of Nand Babu was so elaborate that it was difficult to make its estimation.
His sketches were so fast that they were eqivalent to the artists of Ajanta.
Amongst the Indian artists Nandbabu was only inspired mostly by the Ajanta.
Nand Babu was also extremely successful in drawing wall paintings.
In 1921 he prepared the replica of tiger cave paintings.
The artistic decoration of the three pandals of all India Indian congress of Lucknow, Faizpur and Haripur was also completed by him on the request of Mahatma Gandhi.
In Haripura the folk paintings which could not be understood by the common people were evaluated.
In 1938 he got an invitation from Baroda state.
He decorated `` Kirti Mandir `` with beautiful paintings.
Nand Babu adopted the wall paintings poultice process to paint wall poultice.
Colors and brushes were also self made and not imported.
He proved innumerable experiments with old poultice stuffs and indigenous colors.
He and his hundreds of students adopted this method of preparing paintings.
He also built mud statues and carved shapes on wood.
He drew several paintings of Chinese, Japanese and Persian method.
His paintings became rich with the paintings of Ramayana, Haripura and Saptama and the fineness of the local Bengali arts of Kalighat portraits.
Nand Babu had put life in art.
It seemed as if it had united with his life.
Opposite to this Nand Babu kept progressing.
He had a comprehensive conscience of not being fatigue and which never got tired of new experiments everyday.
His sense of beauty had developed so much that he wanted to see every act and every aspect of life to be drenched in beauty.
He was unhappy with the intellectualism of the current times which had ruined arts and beauty conscience.
If the importance of sense of beauty will decrease then artistic talent will also depreciate.
Nand Babu kept creating rising above artistic techniques and all rules and sub rules.
Art was absorbed in every aspect of his life.
Under the patronage of shree avanindra Nath Thakur Asit Kumar Haldar also got the privilege to learn painting from his companion Nand lal Basu and several senior artists like Suren Ganguly.
They had to do a lot of hard work in inflicting and practicing modern Indian arts.
Empirical stateliness kept providing their creativity absoluteness of time which always remained free from prejudices.
He was born in a peculiar artistic environment in 1890 in Tagore house located in Jodasanko.
at the age of fifteen years he was admitted in the government school of arts, Kolkata.
During that time he looked upon the activities of revival of arts by remaining in the company of popular artists like E. V. Havel and anandkumar Swamy.
He walked on his footprints and the inherent culture and they only became his basic inspiration of creativity in his later life.
In 1921 he prepared the replicas of tiger caves with Nandlal Basu and Surendra Kar.
In 1912 global poet Tagore brought him to Shantiniketan after completing education at art school.
His maternal uncle Avanindranath Thakur assured him that he will train him properly.
One needs to have excellent fervent capacity in order to be an artist.
From 1912 to 1923 he remained in touch with the global poet in the `` art house `` of Shantiniketan.
By this time he had become quite popular in the field of painting.
His excellent pieces of art had set the path for art practitioners.
Asil Haldar had amazing imagination and he also had the vibrant talent of illustration and color management.
He was both an artist and an artisan. Consequently his paintings touched heart.
Sometimes I became arrogant when I saw Gurudev being enchanted by seeing my paintings.
He also composed many songs on the paintings sketched by me.
The genius talent of Asit Haldar was expressed in every situation.
Haldar viewed the large humanity with an emotional and cheerful perspective of a poet.
The global poet had once written in his letter, `` you are not only a painter but also a poet `` .
That is why your brush brings out excellence.
The mat lines and soft colors in background raising upwards in Asit Haldar ` s paintings spread like a poem.
It is a comparative insight of new and old, the childhood phase like a spring and the disappointing phase of an old age.
Asit Haldar has also transformed emotional subjects through materialistic method away from his especial style.
Several virtual expressions seem to be real in title paintings.
In the beginning Asit Kumar Haldar became popular as a wall painter.
His large paintings were built on the wall painting styles and techniques of those times.
Several paintings beautifully express rural children, Santhals and their folk dances.
The rasleela of Krishna and his companions have been decorated with enchanting devotional touch.
The intimate devotion of literature strengthened his art and the creativity of his mind was shown in the seriousness of his paintings.
After returning form foreign in 1923 he worked as a chairperson of art school in Jaipur and Lucknow.
Several excellent works of Haldar have been preserved today in individual and public museums.
Asit Haldar strengthened one more pillar of large bridge of Indian arts on whose strong base art is firmly standing today.
When the pioneer of that age Avani Babu came forward,then K. Venkatappa also became one of his leading disciples.
Before learning from Avani Babu in Kolkata he was being educated in Art school, Madras.
The congenital inspiration of his talent and creativity was perceived.
Hard work and silent satisfaction remained the mission of his life.
This hardworking and true artist chose his specific path with a peculiar mental situation.
He adopted small painting technique which primarily contains Rajput and a little of Mughal style.
Despite being subtle and allusive his expressions are clear and conceivable.
His sketches have clarity and gentle illustrations.
Small illustrations have refined his expressions all the more.
Subject matter is not visible but that is why it has got life and depth.
He understood the creativity,reality and other characteristics of small illustrations and imbibed them.
Consequently his pictorial illustrations contained reality.
He has a musical relationship with nature.
His professionalism becomes introversive and tries to look into the soul of nature.
Natural views appear as subtle feelings of the artist by evolving his internal faith.
The other characteristic of Venkatappa ` s cognition of beauty is his hatha yog.
He is himself a loyal person.
His overbearing personality free from show off is not visible in front of everybody.
He remains immersed in himself but it does not mean that he is not social.
His several paintings express inner frustrations.
Marich in the mask of golden deer standing away was attracting the attention of Janaki sitting beside Rama.
His image was being reflected in the nearby pond.
Rama ` s face is emblematic of desolation and squalor of future crisis.
Sita is afraid and but has full faith on her husband like an ideal Hindu wife.
Arrogant Ravana lost in the dark clouds is realizing his devilish hatred.
Very few Indian painters could adopt this method of illustration.
On the request of the king of Mysore late Krishna Rajendra Jee he drew attractive paintings of Buddha and Rama ` s life in the court of Ambavilas.
The unfortunate thing is that these art treasures being confined in the palaces have become away from the sight of common people.
He has also built small illustrations on elephant ` s teeth.
The queen of Cooch Vihar had asked him to prepare an attractive painting of her dead husband from him.
Despite being near kings,queens and high profile people his great personality was never repressed.
He let the serious business of art roam in the attraction of beautiful colors.
He has his own conditions and his own different style.
Venkatappa has the vanity of an artist but not the artificiality.
The dream of his life was to remain a devotee of art and motivate others also towards it.
After working for some time in Banaras ` s `` Art House `` and Kolkata ` s ` Indian society of Oriental Art `` he went to Rajasthan with his innate creative inspirations.
He remained the principal of Arts school, Jaipur and contributed in the comprehensive expansion of arts.
Painting is that lively object of world which we cannot segregate.
Paintings are always visible in every auspicious occasions of our life.
whatever a human being feels or sees, he paints them on paper, walls, stones etc with colors and brushes.
After the state of being painted is finished we call the observation or basis of consequent feeling as painting and the science is called the art of painting.
He is the real painter who gathers the observations and puts them in front of everybody in the form of sketches.
The creations of Shailendra Dey declined the characteristics of `` Bengal school of art `` .
His significance was lost from the high standards of arts.
Suppose a dance is being performed in front of the temple and a painter wants to sketch this feel.
As soon as the feelings arise in the heart the body itself becomes like that.
That is called the mood of the painter and excellent pictures are drawn in such conditions.
If he wants to draw a laughing, playing painting then he should also act in such a way which expresses the true feeling.
Undoubtedly the eternal feeling and creative streams of an artist flow in parallel.
His vision is so great that the ends of the philosophy of his life could never be found.
This creation of him is not associated to a certain time period but to a truth which is not associated with external forces but with the heart.
Shailendra has flown the source of arts even in deserts.
He has taught arts to many enthusiastic learners and prepared artists.
Kshitindranath majumdar leads the artists who believe in the intrinsic unity of totality of life making spirituality as the basis of modern arts.
From the beginning he had adopted an easy, individual realization.
Therefore he never tampered with his arts.
He has a different system of working as an aware observer.
Most of the excellent basis creations of Majumdar are inspired by the life of this great saint of Bengal.
Kshitindra Majumdar is a staunch Vaishnava.
His consciousness roams like an helpless infant in his self created world.
Though he was brought up in scarcities and could not get full education yet he was inclined towards arts from childhood itself.
From the beginning he was hesitant and talked very less.
He was fond of sitting quietly in a corner with paper and brush and work.
He never cared about popularity or being patted by someone.
The acuteness of artist ` s feelings have made all the visible equipments very sensitive.
In the second scene Krishna in standing in the middle and the girls have encircled him and are happily dancing together.
It is a bright view of beauty and dedication.
Unique and quite heart touching stories of Radha Krishna and Gop Gopikas have been presented through his brush.
The stories of god chaitanya are equally tragic and poignant.
The charming atmosphere in Shakuntala merges with the freshness of colors by scintillating the life of subject.
The body posture of shakuntala has ornamental touch which has been expressed extremely skillfully.
He is extremely conscious in producing latent unity of art.
He is a great artist and he also has a heart of a poet.
Majumdar is among those few artists who have perceived real inner inspiration.
Currently he is working as a chairperson in the fine arts department of Allahabad University.
Sharda Ukil moved towards creativity after experiencing spirituality and philosophy hence he worked on the power of his basic inspiration and inner curiosity while searching for this path.
since childhood he was extremely attracted towards the life of lord Buddha.
He had energy and tranquility for Buddha ` s devotion and spending life in meditation consequently he could draw the pictures of that large, subtle mysterious diversity.
His paintings also contained a put of romanticism.
The trust and devotion on the great personality of Buddha went on transcending in the deep inside Ukil.
He established connection with his soul and express this deep perception through colors and sketches.
He presented the condition of the deprived life and bowed his head even before the unfortunates.
He has specialized in presenting the unhappy, stressed and serious moods of people due to pain.
In the painting `` Sandesh `` a girl is curiously looking at lord Krishna ` s flute and Krishna is sitting hidden in the rainbow and clouds in the sky.
In another painting the pathetic mood of lonely Sita is wonderfully presented.
Majority of Sharda Ukil ` s works are spiritual.
Without thinking about the entire achievement on visuals he expresses the invisible, untouched feelings of his soul through colors.
a painting rated by an individual or with a one sided approach cannot be comprehensive.
Paintings should be ideal.
Ukil has done a great work by establishing `` sharda arts center `` in Delhi.
This organizations has built several popular artists.
Tungnath Srivastava of multifaceted talent has been a true supporter of Indian traditional arts.
He has descended deep into its beauty and achieved the totality of inner objectivity through curious perspective.
He is neither fond of ancientness nor truth.
Copying is the job of a photographer not of an artist.
He evaluates the object from his different angle.
The limitation of arts is endless, it is not restricted to the circumference of a particular country but represents the traditions of several national and international countries.
He believes in appropriate changes as per the age and time.
The real criteria of artistic skill of an artist is imbibing contemporary problems, ideologies and new evolving elements and solving and co-coordinating them according to his style.
He was born in a reputed family of Allahabad.
He generally draws paintings on symbolic method which despite representing Indian tradition is not lagging behind.
Several experiments have been done with color combinations.
He was awarded medals in the J.J. school of art exhibitions, Mumbai in 1955 and 1956.
He has also held his personal exhibitions in Allahabad and Bombay.
He is also interested in dance and music and he keeps telecasting dialogues based on arts through radio.
He has been the secretary of the Art council of Allahabad.
The art of popular progressive artist Chinta prasad was inspired by people ` s struggle.
He wants to get into the infinite, boundless form by unleashing abandoned waves of life.
The groan of pain kept troubling his inner self.
When famine out-broke in Bengal and the humanity cried in pain then his strokes agitated people.
Several views became vocal.
He has attacked the exploiter class through his brush.
At some places there is overwhelming compassion and at other places sarcastic cartoon style which hits.
Several situations of poverty, struggle, and ruins appear before us which we cannot ignore. They agitate our life.
Anxiety is an artist and the beautiful soul of an artist wants to merge into the elegance of nature.
He drew two paintings `` Sangharsh `` and `` vijay `` in a conference organized by people theater council, Allahabad which were highly appreciated.
He has also prepared divine wall paintings that signified India-China friendship.
He tried to get admission into Jaipur school of arts but there also he faced the similar situation.
When the downfall of Burma took place in 1941 he was in Chittagaon.
He was mentally hurt after watching the screaming and dread scenes of that place.
He portrayed the sorrow and grief of the public through poster paintings.
He has also got significant inspiration from the fabric paintings and local arts of Punjab.
when he appeared in the arts field then the resurrection movement was much influenced by its leader Avanindra Nath thakur.
He is an artist of new style who creates paintings based on modern perception and art consciousness.
His paintings are inspired by the works of artists like Paul kli, Kandiski, John miro, Juan Greece.
His creations sketch an extremely sharp and disturbing form of the situations taking place in our surroundings.
Several paintings are sarcastic that are prepared on Cartoon methodology.
They are experimental and try to put specific moods created with the combination of amazing shapes into colors and lines.
Such pictures crawl like helpless earthworms in arousing human sensations, they develop anomalies and they do not entertain rather look disappointing.
Vipin Aggrawal does not support searching for meanings in arts.
He has been to foreign countries and has been participating in contemporary art exhibitions.
Dehradun ` s young architect Ranveer Saxena has given a new twist to picture creativity at real level.
He understands every aspect of arts. Further he is also aware of the fact that an artist has to struggle a lot to jump his limitations.
In the beginning he was inspired by the Bengal school.
The different styles, their way of living, according environment, their nature and every aspect of hilly people has been revealed.
Several paintings symbolize eternal truth and compensation of emotional identification by being lost in his power.
Ranveer is fond of more and more hard work and industriousness which signifies his creative ability.
Actually various kinds of works come up from this.
The reason behind telling this is not criticism of any kind of instinct but the real expression of perceived self realization.
Truth only is beautiful.
Ranveer was born a middle class family of Itawa.
The haste and vexation of various views agitates his soul.
He has presented a series of paintings on tribes from this little reflections of life.
He has made several paintings with water and oil colors.
His sketches are also quite strong and blatant.
He has also used the Chinese-Japanese wash technique inspired by Avandrinath Thakur.
He has also shown the talent of his able creative architect on religious and traditional subjects.
Another popular painter from Dehradun, Dwijen Sen has moved forward with the training of `` Bengal school `` .
The melodic elements of an artist has everlasting relationship with artistic skill.
He has not only created bric-a-brac through colors but has also used sticks and shells.
He was born in Burdawan.
the sudden demise of his father put a certain kind of burden on his mind.
They faced economic crunch, problems of sustaining livelihood arose, he had to face several struggles.
This devotion and his life was pulling his towards Shanti Niketan.
He started learning arts under Prof. Nandlal Basu in Arts Building.
He was also overwhelmed by the creative architect of Prof. Avandri Nath Thakur the devotee of arts.
He was also inspired by the traditional rural style of Binod Bihari Mukherjee.
They are progressive in their perspectives.
The hunger of self realization is a call by seen towards unseen.
Dwijen Sen has given classic expressions to new forms.
Nautiyal is among those senior artists of Lucknow school who are not only interested in the various forms of beauty but have also inspired and nurtured art.
He is amongst the founders of Uttar Pradesh artists union and is interested in established art studios at several places.
His mind centers at the utility aspect of various styles and he has encouraged several exhibitions and art ceremonies.
He has enthusiastically participated in the fine arts council and other contemporary events and industrial exhibitions at Patna.
Today ` s era impacts the art which has given birth to new doctrines and systems but he is fond of `` Satyam sundaram `` .
He is also amongst the senior artists of Lucknow.
He has worked under Veereshwar Sen and Lalit sen.
For sometime he learnt arts in shantiniketan.
He is a painter and a popular graphic artist.
He has extensively traveled across India to study the specifics of arts and crafts.
He has participated in the art exhibition of Mussourie.
He is also an author and a radio negotiant.
The artist of Khurja , Nand Kishore sharma is learning arts since 20-25 years.
He has created pictures in traditional Indian style through various mediums.
He is skilled in drafting and craftsmanship.
He has also adopted new methods and has carried various experiments on subtle ornamentation and artifacts.
Mehta has carried revolutionary experiments in the field of arts.
His style is quite wonderful where expressions are significant and it lacks predicative subject.
When his paintings were kept in exhibition his new experiments everyday amused people all of a sudden.
Kanpur ` s Krishna Khanna leads amongst new artists.
shapes and sizes are not significant in his paintings but symbolic expressions of feelings are significant.
The paintings visualize specific knowledge through extreme individual disciplines.
Khanna is basically a Punjabi but he is living in Kanpur since several years.
He has extensively traveled in India and has visited Europe several times.
He has deeply studied the the modern art streams of other countries.
Another popular artist of Kanpur, Vishwanath Khanna has been a student of Shanti Niketan.
His art is inspired by the ideal traditions of Bengal school. He has learnt art by sitting down the feet of Nandlal Basu.
He is especially influenced by the ancient idol craft of India.
The colors of Rajput and Mughal arts have touched his heart.
In 1946 he was handed over the job of decorating the interior of Meerut ` s Congress session.
He participated in the Buddhist arts exhibition organised by Lalit arts academy in Lucknow, Kanpur, Agra, Bombay, kolkata in 1956.
He has also held personal exhibitions at several places.
He is the member of Uttar Pradesh ` s artists union and all India fine arts and crafts society of New Delhi.
In terms of progress in various trends the artists of Uttar Pradesh do not lag behind anyone.
Several new and old artists are engaged in learning versatile arts away from advertisement and self promotion.
The chairperson of the drawing and painting department, D.A.V college, Kanpur is engaged in learning arts since 1943.
He has not only created arts but also contributed in organization and upliftment of arts.
He has been the director of Allahabad Fine Arts Academy.
He is specialized in graphic arts and as delivered multiple services in the field of arts through new methods regularly.
Harihar Lal is an artist of boundary-traditional style.
Boundaries save the great cultural achievements of India from the prevalent brutal injuries of physical civilization.
He completed his diploma in fine arts from Lucknow government college.
He was sent to shanti niketan by the Uttar Pradesh government for further studies.
He has used the government ` s scholarships to work in various directions, he has especially learnt lanker paintings.
He has also participated in the Berlington House Indian art exhibition held in London in 1935.
Currently he is the head of the department of Government college, Lucknow.
Avtar singh Pawar is a painter and idol maker, he has especially been trained in wall painting and mural.
He educated from Shanti niketan and did diploma in fine arts from there itself.
In 1952 and 1954 he was assigned the job of decoration as a co artist in the all India congress committee session in Kalyani.
Currently he is an associate professor of modelling and statue crafts department in Lucknow ` s Government college of arts and crafts.
Sukhbeer Sanghal is a painter and idol maker.
He has been independently working as a professional artist for 25-30 years.
He has established the organization `` Kala Bharti `` from the point of view of painting, idol making and other training and upliftment of other arts.
In 1946 he was given gold medal in academy of fine arts and in 1943 he received first prize in the art society exhibition of Bombay.
Mukund Dev Ghosh is a professional artist of emerging talent.
He completed diploma in fine arts from Madras.
Currently he has been appointed as a teacher in government intermediate college, Allahabad.
He had made extensive visits in remote areas of India.
He has also been participating in annual exhibitions of academy of fine arts.
Sri Ram Vaish is an expert in graphic and fine arts.
He has been researching on arts in United states of america for two years on the fellowship of Uttar Pradesh government.
He has completed several painting works with Asit Kumar Haldar and Devi Prasad Rai chaudhary.
He takes interest in the upliftment of various systems of the country and abroad.
There is strenuous in almost all the major art exhibitions organized in India.
Currently he is the Principal of B.P.K. government polytechnic in Varanasi.
Ajmat shah is the popular modern artist of Aligarh.
One should not hesitate in moving towards new directions with new imaginary methods.
He did his diploma from Lucknow ` s government college of arts and crafts.
He has conducted individual presentations in Aligarh and Delhi.
Primarily two forms of the developing elements of arts have evolved here.
The Kota bundi style of Jaipur, Jodhpur, Bikaner, Jaisalmer, alwar, Nathdwara, Kishan Garh are the integral organ of the art of this place.
The walls of the main rooms of palaces and large buildings were painted where various mediums and creative techniques were encouraged.
This tradition of painting and folk skills is extremely ancient and sometimes deciding its actual time period become difficult.
This sublime feeling definitely deteriorated in the times of modern systems but the environment did not change.
When the Jaipur school of art was established in 1960,then various new forms of paintings came up.
Popular arts specialist Thomas. H. Hendley had compared the objects made in Jaipur to the fine artifacts of ancient Egypt.
During that time the skilled artist Vishweshwar viewed the specifics for the first time by throwing light on the new formulas of arts.
It won ` t be inappropriate to call Ramgopal Vijayvargiya, one of the most popular Rajasthani artists to be the magician of colors and lines.
He has made several such uncalled and inconceivable postures the subject of his creativity.
Born in a simple family this artist paved a way for himself after struggling a lot in his life and turned towards arts.
Baler was his birthplace. His father worked under the Zamindar of that place and was a professional person and thought of making his son a lawyer.
But the boy was attracted towards arts since the beginning.
He was fond of drawing pictures on walls with chalk and coal.
His other hobby was to collect colorful pictures.
Whenever he got pictures stuck on clothes or a painting kept anywhere, he used to keep them safely.
It seemed as if the treasure of colors opened up before him.
Baler ` s Thakur sahib loved literature and arts.
He got significant inspiration and and encouragement from him in moving ahead.
In the beginning he was mainly influenced by ajanta, the Bengal school.
He has prepared several paintings with this method.
Some of his paintings carry a put of Malwa style.
But his ancient paintings are mainly inspired by Rajasthani traditional culture.
He created such hundreds of paintings which showed the contexts of public life, events and characteristics.
He has also painted several religious and classical subjects.
Opposite to the disinterest producing feelings he is fond of elegance and beauty.
Paintings the ruler of fine arts can very easily connect a soul with another soul by being the medium of mass communication.
Beauty is the structure of painting and reality is not possible without beauty.
We thus cannot live without accepting the supremacy of beauty.
Every human is a painter.
He looks at the nature in the form of several paintings and becomes captivated.
In this world full of paintings he is a painting as well as a painter. He carries these powers in a covert form.
While coordinating with poetry and arts he has initiated such a rejoicing stream which became popular in the form of `` Satyam -Shivam-Sundaram `` in his arts.
There is a similar condition everywhere that is why art is reflects human life. Why isn ` t there a revolution in arts?
The new style movements of France have crossed the boundaries of local arts and moved forward.
It neither has form nor shape.
The unorganized structure of lines are struggling with public interest.
He has carried several experiments in modern style.
His new creations carry a put of modernity yet he has not resorted to disinterest and ugliness.
The style of painting of Bhure singh the skilled painter of rural life is primarily realistic.
He has especially presented such paintings where the images of working and busy people of Rajasthan become explicit.
He devoted several decades quietly in arts without caring about his popularity.
Art was his childhood friend.
He was interested in arts since his birth but he got educated from Pilani.
Birla family provided him scholarship and sent him to Bombay for procuring special studies in arts.
He had a very good practice of drawing image paintings that within 2 minutes he could draw anybody ` s painting.
He has presented several paintings of Ganhiji ` s busy life when he lived with him for few days.
He has presented several portraits inspired by nature ` s beauty, especially the paintings of Himalayas clearly contain this feel.
As far as arts is concerned he believed that ` it does not have any limited field or subject ` .
It is not always fair to imagine dark clouds in clear and free environment.
There is no originality in bringing little change in what is being discussed for ages.
Consequently his paintings carry the fragrance of region and the smell of wet soil.
He has lived in its fragrance and it is the only source of his inspiration.
During his life time he has also been the member of all India fine arts and crafts society and Rajasthan fine arts academy for years.
Rajasthan ` s major artist Krupal singh Shekhawat has earned popularity on international stage of arts.
He has not only imbibed the Rajasthani but also the external influences in his art skills.
He kept working under Nand lala Basu in shanti niketan for four years.
He studied far eastern painting techniques by staying in Japan for three years.
There is comprehensiveness in symbolic illustration, color configuration, drafting and skills.
He has polished his individual art skill at various levels of observance, education and practice.
He has acted with an extremely subtle technique while experimenting with colors.
His control over brush is such which always creates something new with reference to colors.
The Indian government had handed him the work of decorating the basic copy of Indian constitution.
He has drawn several paintings of Gandhiji ` s life as wall paintings in New Delhi ` s Birla House.
Joshi has given an entirely new form to the folk tradition of Rajasthan in his paintings.
He closely studied the life of Bhils and made them his major subjects.
The dressing style of Bhils, way of ornamentation and their various dance forms have been beautifully painted.
He has drawn good pictures of markets of rural life, streets and also of everyday activities.
He received the primary education of arts in Kankrauli where his was associated with the royal temple.
He was specifically influenced by the educational institution, Vidya Bhawan when he came to Udaypur from Nathdwar.
He has especially deeply studied the life and behavior of the Bhils of Mewar by staying close to them.
Rajasthani Bhils are companions of joy, happiness and greenery.
He was sent to Shanti Ninetan for further studies by vidya bhawan.
He only uses water colors or the ordinary colors sold in market.
Another popular artist of local skill Gaurang Chanran is a skilled craftsman of wood.
He had carved several views of the daily life of Rajasthan on wood.
He had inherited arts.
He had to struggle a bit to make his dreams come true but later he was sent to Shanti Niketan to study arts on government scholarship.
He is the believer of Indian traditional style and he has mostly drawn due paintings sitting under its sublime beauty.
He has set his goal in Rajasthani art sector with his hard work and devotion.
Some of his pictures have also been purchased in the art exhibitions of america and England.
The paintings of the popular painter of Kota, Choyal are inspired by the everyday problems which has an amazing combination of imagination and reality.
The impact that happens because of a view or event or an exploitation that disheartens the heart is expressed in the paintings all of a sudden.
I consider progress to be an integral part of life.
The person who moves forward might look back to gather courage but he does not stop , he keeps moving.
The goal of modern artist is also the same.
He does not want to walk on the path of others, he finds his way himself and walk alone on it.
I find it easy and natural to express experience in my own style.
I also have my own existence.
It does not mean that I will live at the mercy of others and die on the support of others.
And it does not also mean that in the name of modern arts I am giving importance to copying the west.
I can never forget that Indian blood in running in my veins.
He has developed the refined straddled beliefs in his own style.
Kota is the birth place of Choyal jee.
In the beginning his art consciousness aroused because of various ornamentation and corroborations.
Many of his paintings are psychological where a subtle analysis of human sentiments are shown.
The symbolic of the pitiable condition of one of his popular paintings, ` bhikhari ` reveals such subtle facts.
The popular artist of Jodhpur Ramniwas Verma has an expertise in the field of ` tempra ` and wash ` methodology.
He has a realistic perspective.
He is fond of making thing things not by patronizing primitive and static traditions but by directly viewing the article.
His childhood was spent in Jodhpur.
His father was a station master hence the interest of the boy developed in a crowded and noisy environment.
The interest of drawing with pencil on paper got inspired with these views.
Interest in folk traditions and the feeling of raising the level of arts through it had aroused in him.
He went to shanti niketan to develop that and study further.
Arts strengthens and reaffirms by combining with new feelings and keeping traditions as the basis.
Verma has mostly used colors made of soil in his paintings.
He has improved the `` wash `` method by combining water color with pastel color.
In portraits there has been an attempt to give a mature look to the background by mixing several colors.
He also uses paper and silk lining.
While painting traditional contexts, entertaining views and ancient stories he used water and oil colors and he is also an expert in graphics.
He has exclusively patronized the Rajasthani style in the activities of lord Krishna.
His paintings are characterized by deep intimacy and emotional vulnerability which directly influences the beholder.
He entirely believes in the life which becomes beautiful day by day.
While virtually it is the world of the artist who believes in pleasure.
Usta Hisamuddin from Bikaner is a popular artist of ancient traditions and classical methods who despite being the champion of the old he tries to move ahead with a modern style.
The tradition of handicraft has been witnessed in his family for generations.
He joined his family business since childhood and learnt the skill from his father.
Over the period of time they have settled in Bikaner under the patronage of king Ram singh since 1612 and was honored as the royal painter.
Hisamuddin is a descendant of this family who has appeared in the field of arts with inherent culture.
He contributed in drawing the ragas and religious contexts on the ramparts of Chandra mahal and phool mahal, doors and beams of wood of the ancient place of Bikaner.
Hisamuddin Usta had been carrying exclusive study in the technical institute of Baroda on government ` s scholarship.
He has learnt a lot in solitude meditation of art away from propaganda and demonstration.
He has also received President ` s award.
They are working as senior artists in the royal art museum for quite a long time.
The art of Gujarat has moved ahead by imbibing new elements everyday along with the changes in folk cultures.
Art evolved in the magnificent culture and great tradition of this place and it was felt by the people.
The elderly women of the house used to clean the house early in the morning and made colorful shapes using stone powder.
God stays in the house which is neat and clean and artistic.
When the revival of arts began with Raja Ravi verma then Gujarat was also did not lag behind.
Here also a contemporary consciousness of art evolved.
Raja Ravi Verma was invited to make few paintings for the king of Baroda.
The walls of palaces and the big buildings of the rich were generally decorated with such paintings.
In 1925 Jagannath Ahiwasi had paved the way of arts with his basic idealizations.
His several disciples have enriched the local arts and made it versatile through their experiments in various directions.
Ravishankar was born on 1892 in Bhavnagar and he learnt music from Sir J. J. school of art under the Principal C. L. Berns.
His aspirations to play with colors became intense after getting inspired by the religious and traditional paintings of Raja Ravi Verma.
Gujarat was untouched from arts during those days and people were not interested in this.
He got the opportunity to study European paintings and Greek statues in the art museum of Baroda.
He showed his eccentric talent by wining gold medal in 1917 in the art society of Bombay.
He equipped the Gujarati papers and books by giving his paintings and increased their usefulness.
He has drawn beautiful sketches on Shri K.M. Munshi ` s historical plays.
In 1936 Rawal traveled far east and got introduced to the major artists of Japan and China.
Rawal has always been eager in getting elaborate information on arts.
A revolution was witnessed in Europe in the 18th century.
New theories were invented.
He wants to put an impact through colors and drawings.
He keeps a high notion regarding an artist.
The slenderness of the flower or the illustration of a tiny speck waving in wind gives a feel of pleasure to the painter.
The painter would be able to tell you the changes in ideas of various influences developed due to the consistency and inconsistency of colors.
She would be able to tell you that which element of attraction is hidden in her own creations and other paintings of the world.
This is the only biggest purpose.
True skill is exposed only through motionless meditation, focus and concentration of esoteric thinking.
Rawal wants to see a moral and mental transformation in the art conscience of India.
His arts contains the feel of amalgamation.
Beauty gives fluidity and vibrancy to the world.
This aimless drama on the name of entertainment would extend for how long?
It is a slow poison whose effect is visible till late. The instinct of looking just for time pass or just to see should be controlled.
