In our country, radio news is still under the government organisation.
Though the private radio stations have open, but they don ` t have permission to broadcast the news.
Hence, the meaning of the radio news, at our place, is Akashwani news.
After independence, the Akashwani news has been developed broadly.
The news organisation of the Akashwani is probably the biggest organisation of the world.
With the expansion of TV , the format and content of Akashwani news has been reformed also, thus , both the news medium could be made according to the changing world.
Sending or broadcasting the human voice through the electromagnetic waves without the help of the wire is called Radio.
The invention of radio keeps an incomparable position in the development of the human civilization.
In a form of a new communication medium, the development of the radio may be called a landmark.
The same thing may be said about TV.
In that, with the audio, videos are also broadcasted.
In the field of the science, in the 19th century, many important inventions happened.
Among them, radio is the one.
On 24th May, 1944, the Italian citizen F. V. Morris started the Telecommunication era by sending the four words `` WHAT HAD GOD WROUGHT `` to almost twenty miles.
He proved that in the ` MORSE CODE ` through the medium of radio waves messages could be sent.
In 1895, Marconi got the success to send and receive the messages till quite far from this method.
During the first world war, the importance of the wire increased and other country started to take interest in this.
After the war, in America, engineers kept experimenting.
It is believed that the first radio station in the world was established in Pittsburgh in America in 1920.
Same year, on 23rd February, 1920 the first program was broadcast in England from Chemsford by Marconi company.
Of November 1922, by the British Broadcasting Corporation the regular radio broadcasting started.
According to the Sengupta committee, in India, the beginning of broadcasting started on 31st July 1924 when the Madras Presidency Radio Club did the broadcasting first time.
Due the pressure of the public, for the development of the radio the government started to give financial support.
Later, in the private field, the Indian Broadcasting Company was established.
About giving license to this, in the government offices the broad discussion happened.
This discussion is still continued in any form.
With the license, the discussion about censorship also occurred.
This was decided that, except especial situation before the broadcasting the censor is not possible and practical.
This was the opinion of the few people that about the development of broadcasting the suggestions by the people should be asked.
Eventually, after a long discussion this decision was taken that for the establishment of the Indian Broadcasting Company the license should be provided.
On 27th March 1925, constitution of this company was granted.
With granting the license, the government has kept some conditions also.
As, for example, whenever the government wish, could examine the radio broadcasting center.
In an emergency, could close the broadcasting center.
Such instructions may release that broadcasting would be on which subject and on which subject the broadcasting should not be done.
Initially, radio used to come under the Industries Department, because the D.G. of post office department and the industries department were one organisation.
Under the new company, on 23 July 1927, Bombay radio station was established.
It was inaugurated by viscera Lord Irvin.
He said in his speech that radio will be a boon for the Indian public because from this the various cultures of India will get encouragement.
He said that from the radio there would not be just a healthy entertainment of people, but there will be help in the circulation of education from this.
There was a close connection of the Indian Broadcasting Company to the Britain ` s Marcony Company.
In the Indian Telegraph Company, the two third capital of the Marconi Company was invested.
To raise the license fee was very hard work.
As for the result, the Indian Broadcasting Company started to run in the loss.
Hence, on 28th February 1930, it was announced to shut down the Indian Broadcasting Company.
Later, due to the pressure of the leaders of the major political parties, the government decided to take the Bombay Radio Station under its right.
This is notable that through the Bombay Station a regular rural program was started in Marathi, Gujarati and Kannada from 1933.
The first communal radio station was set in Bhiwandi of Thane district.
In 1934, Pandit Jawahar Lal Nehru inaugurated the school broadcasting.
Meanwhile, the Madras Radio Club also started to broadcast.
Later, the Madras Municipal Corporation acquired that.
This station kept on running like this from 1st April 1930 to 16th June 1938.
Many local estates also initiated.
As for the result, the radio stations were established in Lahore, Maysoor, Hyderabad, Gwaliar, Baroda and etc. places.
But after getting the Independence to the country, all the radio stations came under the central government.
On 1st January 1936, the establishment of the Delhi Radio Station was a landmark event in India in the history of broadcasting service, because it was the first station under the scheme of development and expansion of communication service.
On this day itself, publication of a new magazine The Indian Listener about the radio programs started also in a new coverage.
After almost twenty years later, its name was changed to Akashwani.
Till this time, the policy of the Indian government had been cleared about broadcasting.
This is completely different from the present situation.
Today the ruling party hopes this that from the Akashwani and Durdarshan only ideas should be broadcasted.
Many schemes were done to save the broadcasting from the political influence.
Many restrictions were implemented on the presentations done by the government employees and young artists.
Who ever government employee used to do broadcasting it was mandatory for him to give the information about this to his senior officials.
Despite this, he has to announce that his projected broadcasting was not related to his government duty.
During the war, the broadcasting came under the censor formally.
Under the chief censor, the controller of the broadcasting was made chief broadcasting censor.
News editor to the local news and the central director was made the censor of the local programs.
Regarding talks, permission had to be taken before from censor.
Where any director of the center feels that the suggestion of the regional censor is illogical and in that issue it is mandatory to have the agreement of regional censor.
This is true that whatever was broadcasted during the war, it was not the ` war propaganda ` .
From the Delhi center under the ` Nai Duniya Program ` many talks were presented which were related to reformation after the war.
The current principal of Jamiya Miliya Dr. Jakir Hussain, (He became the president of the independent India) was the one of the talk presenters under the program `` Nai Duniya `` .
After independence, the pressure started to increase over All India Radio on several issues.
As, for example, at the time of the participation the Mahatma word used to be attached with the name of Gandhi like before.
During this itself, the talks of Jinnah used to be broadcasted also.
Some people raised this objection that with the name of the Gandhi the word `` Mahatma `` is used, whereas with the name of Jinnah `` Kayade Aajam `` is not used.
Sardar Patel did this work that he prevented such musician to present the program some objections had come to light about their personal life.
The impact of this decision was utmost over the centers of Delhi and Lakhnow.
But artists found the retrenchment of this government order also.
Most of the lady singers changed their name.
Now , instead of `` Bai `` they put Devi in their name.
The main music celebrities like Rasulan Bai, Girija Bai, Moti Bai are some example of this.
In the matter of the industrial disputes, the appeal of the ministers and officials in the name of the public will not be broadcasted.
But in condition of the strike by the government workers the government will have right to broadcast its opinion.
To collect the donation, the appeal in the name of the public will not be broadcasted through radio.
After some communal riots, for the peace the joint appeal of Mahatma Gandhi and Jinnah was broadcasted on 15th April 1947 from the Viceray house.
For the newspapers, the deadline of its broadcasting was kept in the morning eight O clock on 16th April.
Due to embargo this appeal could not be done in the morning that day in Telugu, Tamil, Bangla, Marathi and Gujarati news.
The current news director, M. L. Chawala drew the attention of chief director toward this.
After the deliberation, it was decided that in future the deadlines of such press releases should be kept after the morning ten minutes passed to the seven.
After participation, in India total six stations remained in Delhi, Bombay, Calcutta, Madras and Tirchi.
Thus, after 1947 for the development of the Radio the eight five years plannings were made.
In the initial three years plannings the maximum emphasis was over the establishment of the medium wab and supportive centers.
During this, the National Programs and the Vividh Bharti programs were started.
The foreign broadcasting service was expanded.
In 1959, television was started as an experiment.
During the fourth five years planning the medium web broadcasting and foreign broadcasting service was expanded.
During the fifth five years planning, beside of the reformation in the studio the remained works of the previous plannings were completed.
During the sixth five years planning, six local radio stations were open.
Local radio stations were different than regional or zonal centers in this meaning that stations used to broadcast their talk in their familiar way.
During the sixth five years planning, television had been started.
In the coming years, the priority of the government was over the development of the television.
With the organization of the Asian games in the India, suddenly the television was expanded quickly.
Due to having the scene and picture this seemed to people more attractive medium in comparison to the radio.
Due to this reason, the development of the radio became non-essential.
In the towns most of the people started to watch television.
But in the villages, even now the medium of the information is the radio itself.
In the villages due to unavailability of electricity in most of the places, people can not watch T.V.
T.V. sets are expensive also.
After the independence of the country, the demand started to raise to establish an examining committee regarding the work process of radio and its future development.
In this respect itself, on 4th December 1964, the current Information and Broadcasting Minister Indira Gandhi announced the establishment of the Chanda Committee to give the suggestion about broadcasting and information.
The retired controller and auditor of India, General A. K. Chanda was selected as its director.
Chanda Committee submitted its report in 1967 to the government.
The committee gave many important suggestions, in that it was said to start the business-professional broadcasting on radio.
The government accepted it.
Donation committee also suggested to put under two corporations by reestablishing radio and TV.
On this suggestion discussion occurred, but it was said that now it is not the right time to give the autonomy to the radio and T.V., thus, these two divisions will be working under the control of the government.
Now, the broadcasting of the radio is through satellite.
Many changes has occurred in the technology of the radio broadcasting.
Now the digital technology is being used.
After coming off the computer number of changes have occurred in the broadcasting of the radio.
It has impacted also over the contents of the programs and news.
Now, from the track of the radio roaming mobile uplink terminal gets available, from that the coverage of the important functions and sports is broadcasted.
The meaning of the radio is to send the information and to receive.
This broadcasting is done through the electric waves by sending the sounds from one place to another place.
But web radio - is not a broadcasting.
This is based on the internet.
Under this the person who wants to receive the information, from where he has to send the information, from there through the medium of internet he has to connect himself.
In the web radio, it is necessary for the person who receives information to connect to the information broadcasting center to the internet.
The third form of the radio is the DAB (Digital Audio Broadcasting).
This is the mixed form of the normal radio and web radio.
In the developing counties, the trend of web radio is less now.
But gradually its popularity will increase.
Simultaneously the number of the people who work in this will also increase.
Since web radio is a different kind of the medium, hence the journalists who will work in this will have to achieve the special qualification.
The mandatory eligibility for the radio news should be compulsory for the web radio news.
With increasing of the popularity of the web radio, art of writing for this will also develop.
In the country the Compunity Radio is not very old.
During the last 4-5 years, how it has been expanded, it seems from that the Radio Broadcasting can stand up proudly in front of the television.
The idea of the community Radio or communal radio is different from the business broadcasting or public broadcasting hence is different from the commercial and public broadcasting.
The broadcasting of the community radio is done by taking care the interests of the inhabitants who stay in a particular geographical region or a particular community.
The programs which are broadcasted on the community radio are based based on development.
Their objective is also to entertain its listeners.
Community radio cannot broadcast the news or the program based on the news.
But recently, the Indian government has cleared that some special kind of information can be broadcasted from the community radio centers.
In the present, the sponsored programs can not be broadcasted from the community radio centers.
But there is no any restriction in the broadcasting of the sponsored programs prepared by central or state government.
From the community radio, in an hour, five percent advertisements can be broadcasted.
In establishing the community radio centers, the non-govermental organizations are very active.
At first, on 15th October, 2008 in Pastapur village of Mendak district of Andhrapradesh a non government organization was given permission to run the community radio in the name of Sngham radio.
From here, the program is broadcasted from the Deccan Development Society.
These programs could be heard in 75 villages of Andhra Pradesh.
their maximum listeners are some women organizations, for them the Deccan Development Organization works.
To run the community channel just those organizations are given license who have at least three years unstained work experience.
After getting the license, Community Radio Centers can be operated on the transmitter of 100 watts power which could be heard in the radius of 12 kilometers nowadays.
These centers can put antenna of maximum height 30 meters.
There is freedom to the readers of the newspaper that he would read whole newspaper in one time or would read little-by-little in many times.
If the reader of the newspaper wish he would read the first page in the last and later to the rest of the pages, if he does not understand the meaning of any word then the reader may take the help of the dictionary.
But in the radio news audiences don ` t have such kind of freedoms.
If news is not broadcasted on the radio interestingly and if there is tough words in that then listeners will close the radio.
The important thing is this that newspaper is the thing to read, whereas radio is to hear the news.
Due to this reason, the style which is in the writing news can not be the style of the radio.
Natural disasters, strike, band also has impact over normal life, hence, these are given important place in the newspapers.
Beside reporters, the news agencies like P.T.I., Varta and Bhasha are the main source of the news.
Here , it is again to pay attention that the news of the agency is written considering newspaper.
It is better to write twice the number word, hence any mistake should not occur or numbers should be written in score than words.
While writing news, it should not be written breaking the words.
Like some letters of a word in the last of the line and rest of the letters at the beginning of the second line.
While writing digits, precautions are taken.
The words like million and billion of the English should be written in lakh and crore after changing according to the nature of the Hindi.
Like this twenty five percent fifty percent could be written one fourth and half respectively.
To give digits completely is not necessary.
Because, it is problematic to understand by the listener.
By using the words ` almost ` or ` more ` , digits could be written easily.
News related to sports or related to some other subject where number is important, there right number is given.
In the news copy, it should be refrained to use the abbreviation.
Like it is not right to write M.P. for Madhya Pradesh and U.P. for Uttar Pradesh, but the words which have became famous like UNICEF, SARC, NATO, BSP, SP, BJP etc. can be given in the abbreviated forms.
On the radio news the description of dateline, place etc. is in the story itself.
Like newspaper not in the beginning because it is written in the language of the listening.
Like this the use of the words like mentioned above or undermentioned is restricted.
By writing technical, scientific and financial words as it is, audience can not understand the news.
Hence reporter or editor should write the meaning of the technical words in his own words.
While giving the reason of any event, it should be said with the reference of any official or person.
Sometimes, we give the name of the news agency or other source.
This is right.
From this the responsibility of the editor or reporter become very less, as for example, having mutiny in any country it is right to mention the source from where this information got.
Like this, about the incident of the catching fire, with the reference of the fire brigade officials itself its reasons are mentioned.
Thus, to mention the source is always mandatory.
From this, reliability of the news organization increases.
Editor and reporter also get guarded.
To which American journalists call a lead, British journalists call it intro.
From the first line of any news or from the initial two three lines, the success of that story is decided.
Thus, the first sentence of any news should be catchy and interesting, listening that, the audience becomes bound to hear the whole news.
sentences should be small.
By giving more than one information in a sentence, the audience becomes confused.
One question is often asked that how long it should be the story of the radio.
Generally, the story of the radio should not be more than hundred words.
But few incidents are such, where the story is written in more words.
Theory of the reverse pyramid is applicable completely over the newspapers, but this theory does not apply completely over Radio or TV.
Radio news does not have time to present the less important facts.
From beginning to the last, radio news is written in this style that the interest of the audience would retain.
At the last of the radio news also, very important thing should be said.
From this, the story has impact over the audience.
The sentence which is given at the last of the radio news is called snapper.
Snapper of any radio story is a second important fact after its lead.
In the news writing, there is no importance of this thing that you use how heavy and complicated words.
Important thing is this you use how accurate words, which give completely proper meaning.
In the news the use of such words is good, which are completely proper and it has also such pronunciation which match with their meanings.
In the sentences, words should be stringed in this manner that in the mind of the listener or audience the picture of that should be drawn which you want to say.
The language of the broadcasting are written by taking account of illiterate or less educated people.
This is written for the general public, in that every kind of people are included.
Hence, normal colloquial words should be used normally.
Which ever word you use, that should have clear meaning.
The use of the words should be used according to the context.
Technical words should not be used then, when general public do not use it.
if it is necessary somewhere, there use the technical word, and also explain that there.
As for example, in the field of the science and technology, everyday new researches are happening.
For those new words are created.
These words are not popular among the people.
After using such words, it also should be explained.
The all sources of the Hindi and other languages news are in English.
Hence, it is natural that those are translated in Hindi and other languages.
How cleverly we use the words and listener understands it how easily, this should be the criteria of the news writing.
Whatever we write for the radio and television, listener and audiences get just one chance to hear it.
If our words are like this, to understand which listeners get troubled then our news will be ineffective.
The words we use, if there is any possibility of occurrence of the doubt then those should be removed immediately.
In the colloquial language part of any speech should not be mentioned.
The manner to write newspaper should be like this, that, from that it would be recognised that this is the part of the which speech.
Unnecessary words should not be used in the news because in the broadcasting there is importance of the every minute.
Sometimes, in the sentence any word is at which place, from this even the meaning of the sentence gets effected.
Specially, place and date should be mentioned carefully.
For example - ` Supreme court agreed today for the review of its previous descisions.
By writing this in the other way the meaning of the sentence will be changed - ` Supreme Court agreed for the overview of its previous verdict today.
It should be seen in the news that you are writing or saying that only which you want to say.
Due to the diversity of the geographical condition also the form of the words changes, like - we say West Asia to the land, people of Europe and America call that Middle-East.
We use the words to express our thoughts, either by writing or by speaking.
In Hindi and other languages also there are many words which have changed in the especial context and especial meaning.
The words like president and secretary can be taken as for example.
The lead of the Rajya Sabha of the parliament is called the speaker.
Vice president bares this responsibility, he is also the chairperson of the state legislature.
Like this, the speaker of the Lok Sabha is called Adhyaksha in Hindi.
If we would like to use the words scrambling, it will not be proper.
For this, it is mandatory that by the media-workers beside the own country the correct information should be taken about the right name of the legislative functionary.
In India to whom we call ministers, they are called secretary in many countries of the Europe and America.
One thing is very important.
There are many such words, which are called unparliamentory, not in the colloquial language but in the language of the news.
As for example, if someone speaks lie then in the news he is not called a liar, but it is better to say that your statement is away from the truth.
Like this there are many other words, like - deceitful, thief, corrupt, lothario, etc. these should not be used.
There is also need to take care in use of the adjectives and adverbs.
For the noun if any adjective is supposed to be used, then, first relation between those two must be thought of, like - many people speak like this and write that people were present in the meeting in a huge number.
For the people not the quantity, but use of the bulk or number words would be proper.
The adjective ` quantity ` would be proper there, where it is not possible to count the noun object, but its measurement is done by the weighing.
People could be counted, cannot be weighted.
While using the noun words, the thing should be taken care that how it is pronounced and which noun indicats towards which object, place or name.
Sometime, due to name of the people mistake occurs without any reason, like - ` Beant Singh ` is name of a Congress Leader.
It was also the name of the killer of Mrs. Indira Gandhi.
` Digvijay Singh ` was the chief minister of the Madhya Pradesh state, there was name ` Digvijay Singh ` of a member of parliament who is from Bihar.
Though, name of an another member of parliament is Bhui ` Digvijay Singh ` , who is from some other state.
Sometimes, due to historical reasons also, the meaning of some nouns becomes conventional, there might be some other meaning of those words generally.
In the ancient enchantings of Rigveda, the meaning of the ` Asura ` word used to be deity but it seems that later when two groups were made of them then name of a group Asura and name of another became Sur means deity.
In the Sanskrit there is an idiom ` dear to deity ` .
It does not have meaning that lovable to deities, but it has meaning in Sanskrit ` foolish ` .
It seems that the scholars of Sanskrit who were the adversary of the king Ashoka made popular this idiom with this meaning because King Ashoka used to write his title ` Devata Priyah: `
Like this the Sanskrit root of the words Ponga and Buddha are Pungav (superior man) and Buddha (enlighten), but due to some reason, in the language meaning of these words became completely opposite.
Like this, in colloquial speech also many words become popular.
It seems like that, by adding the Maha word with the motive to emphasize more, it became fashion to create new words in the news.
For example, ` Kumbh ` word is there.
it has a meaning - earthen pot.
But, the festival, which is organised after the gap of twelve years in Ilahbad, Nasik, Ujjain and Haridwar is called Kumbh.
Looking at its hugeness and importance, it is called Mahakumbh.
This is a religious and cultural word.
But, the word Mahakumbh is used sometimes for different kind of big conferences also, which is not right.
To select the first sentence of the news is also not an easy job.
But after the practice of some time, even this work starts to be done easily.
The success of the whole news depends over the first sentence of the news.
In writing the news, the most important moment is the one, when some one pick up the pen to write the news or starts to type on typewriter, starts to work on computer or make some on write by dectating.
At that moment it should be thought that the news is about whom and why this news should be broadcasted?
After the answer of these two questions, it will be clear that how you should write this news.
It is not necessary in the radio and television that all the five ` K ` should be used in the first sentence itself.
But in the whole newspaper, according to the context somewhere they must be mentioned.
In the first sentence, the name of a person should not be given, to whom people don ` t know.
In the first sentence, ` who? ` must be mentioned, to whom general public doesn ` t know.
In the world of the radio and television when you think about the first sentence of the news, at that time itself, you should keep thinking about the last sentence of that news.
The last sentence should be very effective.
Rather, last sentence should be the theme of the whole news.
Yes, this thing should be taken care that in the news, words should not be repeated.
The theory of ` reverse pyramid ` doesn ` t apply over radio and television.
In the radio and television news, every sentence is important.
News should be clear and brief.
In the news the flow of the thoughts should be natural.
Complex sentences should be changed into simple sentences by breaking them.
The meaning is, that whatever should be written, should be clear and no one should have any problem understanding its meaning.
It happens often that whatever we write or speak, people cannot understand the meaning of that.
Its main reason is - deffective sentence construction.
Sometimes, despite of having proper sentence construction such words come in the sentence, from that meaning gets change of something.
It is called lax error.
The reason to come the lax error in the sentences is; not having proper knowledge of the words, mistake of the grammar and not to use the words in the proper place.
In the radio news, till how extent it is possible, sentence should be simple.
There is problem in delivering mixed or adjunct sentences and also in listening.
Some people think their intellectuality in this that how many conjunctive and complex sentences they have written.
But, it is their mistake.
It is not possible for everyone to say his own things in simple sentences.
This is an art.
It takes years for the People who work in the broadcasting genre to achieve the capability to say his words in simple sentences.
Most of the material of the Hindi news is basically in English itself.
Even, most of the conferences are organised through the English medium itself.
Thus, to make the radio and television news in Hindi, there is need of the good knowledge of English.
This is not enough, there should be expertise to translate Hindi from English.
There are many words in English, which has literary meaning something else, but has something different meaning in use.
In the news, this practical meaning is expressed.
For example, usually investigation of any event is ordered by the administration.
Now this inspection may be administrative inspection.
This inspection may be judicial or magistralial.
Most of the people cannot understand the difference which is between the judicial and magistralial investigation and in Hindi write judicial investigation for the both kinds of investigations.
But this is wrong.
In such conditions, either let it be the same word for the judicial investigation or say it ` Nyayik Janch ` .
But for the magisterial investigation never use the word, judicial investigation.
While translating for radio and television news, often, such mistakes occur, when the spelling of the person and places is written wrong, after hearing those the mind of the audiences become irate.
Hence, while translating it should be taken care that name of the places and people should be written or read like the manner how it is written and read in the native language.
In the field of translation one more habit is observed.
This habit is not right.
This would be better that Dordarshan news should be told.
General public understands this.
It is not right to say partial English and partial Hindi.
While translating it should also be seen that in a news and in a whole bulletin one word should have one translation.
It should not happen, that many synonymous of a word of English should be given in a news itself.
This precaution must be taken care of while translating the nouns.
Whenever translation should be done in news, then attempt should be this that translated material should be simple, it should not sound artificial language.
The most important quality of the translation is this, that in which all the things of the original would retain.
Second thing is this that the translated material should not look like from anywhere that it is a translated material.
While translating from English to Hindi, it is must to take care the nature of Hindi language.
Some examples are enough - how proper is it to translate ` to hit the head lines ` as ` to wound the main news ` ?
Anyone can understand this.
Some more examples; translation of ` flying visit ` as ` to travel from the plane ` , translation of ` save screen ` as ` save your own skin ` .
The translation of ` oil seed ` as ` seeds of the oil ` can not be said proper.
There are many mistakes in the translation of ` anniversary ` word in Hindi.
Actually, ` Birtday ` or ` Foundation day ` and their ` anniversary ` , both are the representatives of different days.
The level of Hindi journalism is said inferior in comparison of English journalism.
The biggest reason of this is that the main material of the Hindi journalism is in Hindi, which has to be translated.
Translated language becomes artificial language.
Very few people, on the basis of English material can write in Hindi.
The second reason is this that English words cannot be translated properly in Hindi.
Often, people do the word translation, from that, the very absurd situation happens and people start to comment over Hindi journalism.
In the news there should be semantic translation.
In Hindi, habit to adopt the borrowed words is also becoming stronger.
Sometimes, it breaks all the limitation of significance.
At many places, for the past days it has been heard saying coming day.
The use of the idioms makes the language interesting.
But in the use of the idioms the precautions should be taken.
Many times by the use of the wrong idioms, even the news, which is written properly losses its meaning.
A phrase which is made by the use of some words are called idioms, which has its special meaning.
By doing any kind of change in the construction of the phrases, the significance meaning comes out from that phrase that finishes and that cluster does not remain idiom.
Idioms should be used by looking at this factor.
On the basis of context and use, meaning of the words of the idioms changes.
It is not possible to translate one language idiom, word to word in another language.
If we will try to translate then the result will be very absurd.
Yeas, sometime there me be idioms which give the same meaning in two languages.
In such condition, in place of idiom of one language idiom of another language may be put, like there is an English idiom - `` Aa hard nut to crack `` , in Hindi the idiom which give its meaning is - `` tedhi khir `` .
Instead of this, ` lohe ke Chane chabana ` etc. idioms can be used carefully.
Actually, it is not possible to translate idiom of a language into another language, like - some people translate ` to play with fire ` literally as to play with fire.
This is not right.
Yes, utmost ` to play with the fire ` may be said.
Like this it is not right to translate ` burning question ` as ` Jalta Sawal ` .
For this to write ` jwalant prashan ` or ` jwalant udaharan ` would be proper.
The summary is this that it is not proper to make the Hindi idioms on the basis of English idioms.
Once I read in a popular newspaper - ` the last war for the throne of Lakhnau.
This was the first headline of that newspaper.
It is clear from the use of the words that it has been used in the context where its real meaning is something else.
But, here it points to some other meaning.
But by the use of such idioms, good news does not form.
Till listener or viewer does not understand this, that in which context it has been used till then the motivation of use of such words cannot be fulfilled.
But, in the similar volume of the newspaper two more idioms had been used, due to that the writing of that writer had become much better.
See an experiment - ` on the order of the supreme leader party workers announced to support the candidate, but later ran away.
Like this, the difficulty comes in the translation of idioms.
Every idiom is based on the history of the particular region, its social culture, and its geographical condition.
Like - it is not possible to change the snowfall of Kashmir to the circumstance of sandstorm of the Rajasthan.
Idiom cannot be translated literally.
If there is any idiom in other language which has a similar meaning of an idiom of the language then it may be used.
If the meaning of the English idiom does not get understood, then it will be better to leave it.
Nowadays, in various television channels, idioms, sayings and phrases are being used drastically.
This is the reason that most of the people watch these channels.
In the radio news and television news, from the use of the idioms and phrases we may make the language effective.
From the use of the adjectives and adverbs, many time mistakes happen while forming idiomatic language and it becomes bizarre.
Example - ` due to the political instability the fall in the stocks stopped.
Here the meaning of the writer is this, that due to the political instability the decline which was coming in stock prices, it stopped.
But from the sentence formation it seems also that due to the political instability the declination of the stocks stopped.
Whereas, it is not possible.
When there would be political instability then the stock market will start to decline.
The book of the famous linguist Badrinath Kapoor ` Adhunik Hindi Prayog Kosh ` is a useful book for the knowledge of the idioms.
Students of the journalism may read this.
The political activities are of two types.
One is, any incident and another is the activities of the political leaders.
While writing the political news there should be a clear distinction between the event and thought.
Politicians should notice only those thoughts which have news.
While writing the news related to political debate, it is mandatory to do reporting with impartiality and honesty.
They should not let their own political thoughts influence to the news.
While presenting news of any political issue the thoughts of different people related to which, should be included in the news.
It is mandatory to make balance in the news.
If there is news in a political speech then it should be noticed but it is not proper to make radio news the medium of advertisement.
While presenting news related to communal violence or caste violence, the name of the casts and religion should not be mentioned.
Such news should be given after complete investigation itself.
If, from the broadcasting of the facts of the event there would be danger of increasing the violence then, it should not be broadcast.
The source of the news of damage from such incidents should be given also.
The speech which solace the violence should be given priority.
Words like temple, mosque, religion, Geeta, Kuran should not be used.
The name of the affected people should not be given, because by doing so religions and casts may be recognised and due to this tension may increase.
The important verdicts and directives of courts are news.
While writing such news utmost care should be taken.
It might not happen that from the news court would be contemplated.
The best way for this is that the verdict or directives of the court should not be explained.
Only pure news should be given.
If it ` s necessary, then the mandatory background should be included in the news, thus, the audience would understand the news.
In the perspective of the judiciary, a person is not considered a criminal till he does not get sentenced.
The incidents which occur overseas also get the place in the radio news bulletin.
Since, there is influence of changing of big countries over our country also.
Despite of that, now in the abroad Indians in the huge number are living.
In the country people are curious to know about their interest or about them.
About overseas, most of the news comes from foreign agencies.
Those should be written again according to the law of our country.
Any ethnic word should not be used.
The news about weather must be presented.
This news can be gotten from the weather scientist or may be formed according to the bulletin published by the weather department.
News related to earthquake, blast, war, kidnapping come in this category.
While writing such news, beside new information related to the incident the main thing about the incident should be repeated.
Because many listeners might have not heard this news before, for their knowledge to do this is necessary.
India is a democratic country.
Radio and Durdarshan are responsible toward people through parliament due to being in the government control.
To provide information to people is the responsibility of these two institutions.
Hence, they should work with fairness and truth.
Under the judiciary and the administration and taking care the security of the country these two organizations should provide the news in the public welfare.
`` Interview ` is an important medium of the news.
To take interview is an art.
Without being an expert in interview any journalist cannot be a great journalist.
The complete information about any incident cannot be forgathered without talking with all the related parties.
In this process, we have to take interviews of people.
On the basis of only government press note or speeches the information of the correct news cannot be provided.
Broadly, there are two types of interview.
In the first category, there is the interview in which the information about any person ` s personality is collected.
In the interview of the second category the information about any news is collected.
In the second type of interview itself the news comes out.
About any incident the information about anybody ` s reaction, the facts related to which and the cause of the incident etc. can be gathered from such kind of interviews.
Before the interview, the reporter should collect the information about the subject.
In this context the newspaper cutting, agency copy or any book, whatever material is available should be looked out.
The objective of the meeting is not to exchange the thoughts, but to gather the information.
Many people hesitate in front of the media to tell anything but after talking for a while even such people start to give important information.
The reporter who does interviews always should have this motive that he could get some information.
After getting the important information, interview should not be stopped immediately.
By this, the person who is giving interview may doubt.
In the interview, the success of the interview depends on the first moment of the meeting and first question itself.
The important question should not be asked just after the meeting.
After doing some light talk, the interviewee should be brought in the facile condition.
Later, gradually the important question should be asked.
If it ` s not necessary the such question should not be asked answer of which could be given in ` yes ` or ` no ` .
The success of the reporter is on this thing that he could control on the conversation.
While conducting the interview, the physical expressions of the person who is interviewed should be observed.
In the television the picture is also recorded, but radio correspondent should explain it in his/her words.
The important thing is this that in the heart of the person, who is being interviewed the faith should be developed by the correspondent.
A relation should be established that he/ she could talk openly.
He should not open the notebook immediately.
If Interview is conducted without recorder or interview, then don ` t take the notebook out immediately.
Some people become nervous just seeing the notebook.
In opposite of that, many people want that it should be published exactly what they are saying, hence there is no such definite principle about the notebook.
It is proper that that the important conversations of the interview should be jotted down and it should be kept safe.
To take the note it is not mandatory to know the shorthand.
Every reporter should develop his own style, from that, important conversations should be jotted down as soon as possible.
Despite of the news style, the interview may be written in the question-answer style or in the metaphorical style also.
It is better to write in the question-answer style the interview based on the personality, whereas, the content which gotten from the interview may be presented also metaphorically in the literary style.
If during the interview anything has been said ` off the record ` , then it should not be broadcasted or published.
But many times, `` off the record `` gossip which is said in the public welfare is also included in the news, regarding this the reporter ` s own wisdom is conclusive.
The interview is an important medium of the news.
In the whole world, many changes have occurred due to the story written after the interview.
The Governments are also demolished.
The economic turmoil happens.
Now reporters have to read news like the news reader.
While voice casting, reporter, himself reads the news written by him.
The language of the radio news the colloquial language.
But, while speaking people speak in this way that their speech cannot be understood.
Reporter should also improve his voice by practicing.
The pronunciation should be correct.
Every word should be clear.
Some people chew the words.
This is not proper.
Every word should be pronounced separately.
Governor Ram Naresh Yadav has paid homage on miss Gandhi ` s birth anniversary by remembering her.
Yesterday, Electricity production got affected due to catching fire during the electricity production in the Singaji Power Plant.
Though, the fire was brought under control immediately.
The executive director of the plant R. K. Date clarified, this is a minor accident, which will be corrected shortly.
Due to the cold wind the temperature of most of the places of the state went down.
The night temperature in Indore was registered 11.4 degree Celsius, at the same place the day temperature remained 27 degree Celsius.
According to the weather center, the minimum night temperature was registered in Damoh.
This year, due to good rain and blowing of north-east wind the impact of cold is increasing.
In the coming days there is possiblity of more fall down in the temperature.
The star propagators of all the big parties in Rajasthan - Congress, Bhartiya Janta Party, Bahujan Samaj Party and CPM are addressing the election rallies at different places.
In the state, the command of the Congress election campaign is in the hand of the senior leader Gulam Nabi Azad.
For the election campaign of the Congress candidates, beside the chief ministers of Haryana and Uttarakhand with the senior leaders of party Salman Khursheed and Sailja Rajbabbar is also coming.
For the BJP candidates, for the campaign the candidate for the post of Priminister Narendra Modi will address today the election campaign rallies in Anta, Chittorgadh, Kota and Banswada.
In Bikaner Kolayat, Nokha, and east Bikaner has been announced sensitive.
On these sensitive polling booths the central paramilitary forces will be appointed.
He summoned a notice to an absent worker during the training of the polling officers.
Dr. Manmohan Singh said that security forces will have to be alert to face the terrorists.
Loksabha president Meera Kumar has said that there is a need to change in the thinking of the society towards women.
Yesterday, in Kolkata, in a program on women empowerment she said that India is the country of paradoxes.
In the country goddesses of wealth, education and power are worshiped, but generally girl child education is not being taken care.
Information and Broadcasting minister Manish Tiwari has said that till it does not become the threat to the country ` s security, the government is not in favor to put any restriction on social media.
Yesterday, in Indore, he said that freedom to express in the country will continue.
Mr. Tiwari criticized those state governments who do not apply central schemes by making their schemes.
He asked to submit within ten days the complete list of the teacher vacancies according to the need.
These appointments will be done through the Bihar Public Service Commission.
He said that the granted collages which have enough land, those institutions will be developed as the center for excellence.
Patna police has formed a team to arrest the Tahsin Akhtar aka Monu and Haidar Ali aka Abdulla from Indian Mujahideen, IMA.
Police superintendent Patna region, Sushil Khopde said that Bihar ` s Anti Terrorism Squad, ATS will also help this team.
The former chief minister and senior leader of RJD Rabari Devi said that the financial mismanagement is going on in Bihar.
The chief accountant had revealed this irregularity in his report.
Thousand crores AC-DC bill has not been adjusted untill now.
He said that the money of the state ` s treasure is removed fraudulently in the cities of the South India and the government does not pick this up.
Rabari Devi has demanded the CBI investigation for the whole incident and the resignation of the chief minister.
On the other side, National Lok Samta Party by declaring fail to Nitish government at every level has evoked people to through this government.
Yesterday, the national president of the Party, Upendra Kushwaha said to the journalist during conversation that public has handed over the power with majority to Nitish Kumar with big hope but he failed to meet the expectations of people.
Public court organised in the Patna judiciary block has cleared the cases of more than nine thousand people ` s cases.
He said that for the hearing in Patna zone thirty nine committees had been formed.
Under this campaign, which would be running for twenty four days the vaccine will be given to the children of the age one to fifteen years.
Under the special vaccination campaign, madarsa, schools, anganbadi will be focused mainly.
Under the campaign, in the Samastipur district the goal to vaccinate fourteen lakhs children has been decided.
On the other side, this campaign will be run in Arariya, Arwal, Sivan, Banka, Baksar, Bhagalpur, Nawada, Mujapharpur, Vaishali, east and west Champaran districts.
Chief minister Hemant Soren has announced to give ten lakhs to the Mukhiya of every Panchayat for the development.
Today on the day of the fifty sixth martyrdom day of the martyr soldiers, Chief Minister was addressing the people.
He announced to make the stadium on the martyrdom place of the martyr Sona Sobaran.
On the issue of the Para teachers, Mr. Soren said that the government will take the decision very soon on this matter.
On this occasion he inaugurated the Sona Sobran plus two school in Lukaiyatand and sub health center in Nemra.
On this occasion the ex-chief minister Shibu soren and minister Jayprakash Bhai Patel were alos present there.
The energy minister of the state has said that the price of the electricity in Jharkhand will not be raised.
He said in Giridih during conversation with the journalists that Jharkhand state electricity board is having loss of hundred fifty crores every year.
This loss was earlier of hundred sixty five crores.
In the answer of a question, Mr. Singh said that there is no difference among the supporting parties of the state.
The Rural Development minister Dadai Dube has shown the deep discontent on the pace of development in the state.
Mr. Dube said today in Bokaro that what development is being done in the state, everyone is watching this.
He said that yesterday, at the meeting of the state cabinet these issues will be raised.
Simultaneously, he also said this that, to judge the work of the government in a few months would be impulsive.
The secretary of the Central Rural Development Department, L C Goyal has said that to strengthen the rural economy system the self helping women ` s groups will be made stronger.
He did appeal to the women of the Naxal affected areas to present the example in the whole country.
He said about the BPL index which is made for the people who are living below the poverty line that in the coming few months the work of the survey will be initiated.
Women and child development legislative committee, even second day actively invigilated the boarding schools of Khooti.
Took the view of the facilities which is being given to the residential schools of Kundi and Murhu.
Simultaneously, showed the worry over the lack of English and Science teacher.
The chairman of the committee, Menka Sardar said that the department will be aware of the lack of the teachers.
The chief minister, Hemant Soren said that the people who don ` t have a toilet in their home, they should be prohibited to fight in the election.
The chief minister was addressing today The World Toilet Day seminar, organised by the Drinkig water and Sanitation Department in a hotel.
He said that, being the representative of public it is my duty that in every house there should be a toilet.
Shri Soren said that Vat which apply on the pan which is used in the making of the toilet, will be ended soon.
He said that it is ambition of the government to supply the pure water to every village by two thousand seventeen.
In the function, the parents of Depika, the international player of archery, were honored by giving check of four lacks twenty two thousand rupees.
Secretary of the State minorities commission, Shahid Akhtar has said that commission is working to get the benefit to every school (Madarsa).
Shri Akhtar said today in Sahabganj that in the state the population of the minorities is thirty-five percent, but according to this proportion they are not getting to participate in the development programs.
During his Sahebganj visit, he said that in the district minorities have got very less benefit.
Central Petroleum and Natural Gas minister M. Veerappa Moili has proposed yesterday to open the organisation related to the Oil Refinery in Panipat of Haryana.
Shri Moilee said after the inauguration of the country ` s first synthetic rubber plant that he will talk to the chief minister Bhupendra Singh Huda regarding this organization.
He said that Petroleum Ministry is ready to train the youth through the training centers in different Oil Refineries with Panipat.
Through agriculture department, modern machine grant will be made available to the farmers of scheduled caste and women farmers.
There is facility of seven thousand rupees on the cultivator, forty thousand rupees for power weeder, twenty thousand rupees on Rotavetar and zero till drill.
Village of the Saha development block of Ambala, Shergadh Pradesh has been included in the category of the Nirmal villages.
In addition, making toilet in every house of the village public toilets have been made also for poor people.
Not just this, in this village the water extraction and other activity of cleanliness also have been established properly in comparison of other villages.
Also in the Angan wadi of this village of about population of six hundred and fifty, from the small age itself the habit of using it could be established in children.
In the primary school of the village, isolated toilets for girls and boys have been built.
In the sanitation of the village, beside sweepers which are appointed under the government scheme villagers also give complete support and with the support of the whole village itself this village has got the Nirmal Village award.
Ten days National Craft Fair, which started at kalagram in Chandigarh has become the center of people ` attraction.
In this stalls has been made to show the best handmade crafts of different states and home furnishing thing are being sold also.
In this, the glimpse of the cultures of different states is getting to see.
Hariyanvi flute and Algoja, Panjabi Bhangra and the music of Rajasthani Sarangi is alluring people.
In the Pinjore Garden, two days grand Pinjore Heritage festival has been started.
The motivation of this is to make people aware of its culture and simultaneously provide them the opportunity to take the pleasure of the spectacular garden.
During the festival, beside of organising Rangoli, face painting, Mehndi and dance competition for children, artists are also invited to perform the folk dance.
During this, beside of putting the stalls of different dishes, craft market is also formed, in that artist, weavers sell their stuff also.
With the objective of giving strength to the mutual friendship, Indian army had started the meeting series in nineteen hundred ninety five.
After that, every time the number of the participant countries has increased.
In the first meeting ceremony, the navy of Indonesia, Singapore, Shrilanks and Thailand had participated.
After the Kargil war, looking at the marital importance the first joint command was formed in the archipelago.
In this coastguards are also included with Army, Navy and Airforce.
The main objective of joint command is ` victory with the unity of power ` .
Preparation for this celebration has been completed before.
For the Milan-2014, the Navy Jetti has been made the center place.
Here, all the foreign ships will be porting.
The whole jetty has been decorated attractively.
Women self helping centers will be provided financial help on the interest rate of seven percent.
To encourage the employment of the poor women of rural area and to make them empowered National Rural Employment Mission is being run from the Rural Development Ministery.
In May 2013, Indian Government had accepted the financial support for the loan.
In the November 2013, Indian Reserve Bank and Nabard passed the guidelines for its operation.
To implement this scheme, guidelines were passed to every bank and R.R.B. and cooperative banks.
The former justice Ashok Kumar Mathur has been appointed as the chairman of the seventh Central pay commission.
In the expenditure department, the special officer Ms. Meena Agrawal would be the secretary of the commission.
The commmission has been told to give a report in the period of two years.
Our reporter has given the information that to reform the salary of the its workers, government forms the pay commission after every ten years.
Newly formed Pay Commission will amend the salary of more than 50 lakhs workers of Central government and pension of about thirty lakh pensoners.
Chief minister Bhupendra Singh Hudda has assured that on the central level Jat will get the reservation soon.
He was addressing today a function which was organized in a Choturam park on the occasion of Chotu Ram jubilee.
He said that Jats have got the reservation and very soon they will get the reservation in center also.
He said that In Hariyana total 70 percent reservation is being given and financially weak classes are also getting benefitted by it.
The former minister of Haryana Mrs. Shanti Rathi had died today in Sonipat.
She was eighty years old and was not keeping well since few days.
Mrs. Rathi had been elected from the Gannaur assembly constituency in 1977 and in 1991.
MP Mr. Hudda also kept the foundation of a block level Rajeev Gandhi Seva Sadan.
Last evening, near Rohtak Ismailiya village five people died in a road accident.
Through the crash both vehicles became damaged badly.
Its recommendations will be applicable from first January two thousand sixteen.
The festival of Basant Panchami was celebrated yesterday in the whole state in the environment of complete devotion and joy.
Despite of cold in the different region of the country, people have taken bath in
The continuation of the bath continued till late at night.
This was the fourth important bath festival of the fair.
The fifth important bath festival of the fair would be on fourteenth February on the day of Maghi Purnima.
Yesterday at the other religious places also the huge rush of devotees was there.
On the other side, in the whole Brij region, there was a splash of the Basant Panchami yesterday.
In the Brij region the Holi has been started from yesterday.
Despite of that, on the occasion of Basant Pachami people worshipped the goddess of learning and knowledge Maa Saraswati.
From the Pandal committees, various cultural programs were organised, which went on late at the night.
Yesterday itself , the birth anniversary of Hindi poet Suryakant Tripathi Nirala was also celebrated.
The Cabinet committee, which is formed on the basis of Unique Identification Authority of India UIDAI has scheduled again the state ` s name for the registration of the Adhar number.
In the Bundelkhand region, power projects, which run on the solar energy of hundred ten megawatts would be planted.
For these projects which would be planted in the private sector, the agreement between the government and the industrialist has been done.
A newspaper agency has given the information that for these projects the preparation for the land acquisition is being done.
The cooperative sugar mills of the state have done the crushing of sugarcanes more the estimate.
They said that, till now the farmers have been paid the sugarcane price of four hundred sixty eight crore eighty seven lakhs rupees.
He said that the sugar mills which are closed for years will be open.
From today, in Noida the Auto Expo Vehicle fair is being started.
At the fair the seventy new vehicles will be presented.
Among these twenty six are global modals.
The fair will run until eleventh February.
The initial two days of the fair would be just for media.
Entry of the general public will start from seventh February.
Due to the lack of the space, the fair has been separated in two parts.
President Pranav Mukharjee has honored the known cricket player Tendulkar and laureate scientist C N R Rao from the country ` s highest civilian honor ` Bharat Ratna ` .
Today at the ceremony organized in the president ` s house, Mr. Mukharjee awarded Bharat Ratna to these two personalities.
Sachin Tendulkar had taken the retirement from the international cricket.
He is the first player to get this highest honor.
If it was, then today the art lovers would have got the proper platform, players had not to take the entry in the field by paying fees and in every district at least there was one auditorium.
