The products thus produced can become an additional mode of income for the farmers .
Button flower , paper flower , leguras , Belly Button , everlasting flower , statis , jipsephilla etc are dried using air .
Some flowers and parts of plants such as fruits etc are dried while they hang along the plants , that is called radical static drying .
Hanging drying - In this method the flowers are dried by hanging them in an inverted position .
After making the bunches , the flowers are hung in a cool and dark room for a couple of weeks .
Straw flower , paper flower , bougainvillea and statis etc can be dried using this method .
Even plate drying - In this method the flowers are kept in a dark room on an even plate and allowed to dry without any light .
Bring out the flowers from the drying agent when they are totally dry .
Store the flowers properly after taking them out because they can become brittle .
Drying through pressure - This method is also called Herbarium method .
In this method the flowers and leaves are pressed under blotting paper or newspaper and pressed under Herbarium press .
Every third day the flowers are turned and kept on a new layer of paper so that the they do not get infected by fungus and do not become black .
The flowers lose their shape during this method but the color is intact .
The flowers dried using this method are used to make greeting letters , paper weight , book mark , wall hanging , continuity etc. .
Drying using frozen method - The quality of flowers dried using this method is more than double .
In this method the flowers are brought and put inside the fridge dryer and the flowers are frozen at -350 Celsius .
This method is costlier as compared to other methods .
Drying through water-the flowers whose petals become brittle after drying are dried with water .
In this method the lower portion of the stems of the flowers are diagonally cut through scissor or knife so that the absorption of water is proper at the time of drying .
Drying through glycerine - Primarily the leaves are dried using this method .
The leaves that are shining and are colorful -LRB- yellow , red , brown colored -RRB- and flexible can easily be dried using glycerin .
Foe example rubber , jasmine , white lead , maple , poplar etc. .
These decorative products provide opportunities of self employment .
Greeting letters , wall hangings , book marks , paper weight or flower set up are major among these crafts .
For making greeting cards the flowers dried through pressure methods are used , we can use the flowers that are stored after drying to make greeting cards by pasting them on ivory sheets or thick papers .
After the completion of a design , keep the greeting card inside a book or herbarium press , pressing it for 7-8 hours , take them out after that .
Likewise book marks , hangings , continuities , wall graffiti , paper weight etc can be made using different sizes of boards .
Cut an ivory sheet into tablets of 1 inch width for making book marks .
Use the pressed and dried flowers and leaves over these tablets .
Paste these flowers and leaves as decorative elements using glue .
When the pasting is over , keep the book mark pressing beneath a glass and allow it to dry .
The flowers dried through pressure drying method are used for making paper weight .
Ornaments can be made from the flower seeds , petals and also whole flowers .
From the seeds of flowers such as shivdarshan , rudraksh and basil , garlands , ear rings and orchid ornaments can be made .
The flowers can be dried and arranged in basket to make flower arrangement .
Two kinds of arrangements can be made in the same basket , one which is displayed from all sides starting from the middle of the arranged basket and has a high background .
Ferns , peacock feathers , leaves of the long sticks of silver oak are used for making backgrounds in such arrangements .
For making pot pourri we need flowers , leaves , stems of flowers and fruits and perfumes are used .
Pot pourri thus made has more demand in the market and it is sold at good price .
The dry flowers can be packed using various ways such as poly bag , window box , wooden box , cardboard box or bag .
The lower portion of the flowers are made into bunches by tying them with thread .
The bunch is wrapped in a tissue paper .
Then after they are closed in a cardboard box in such a manner so that no sun rays can enter inside it .
Make sure that the packing ingredients should be such stable and strong that during storage and transportation of the dry flowers there is no harm .
In fact the seedy fruits are infected from many kinds of diseases and insects but the problem of folio hair is majorly found in peach .
Because of this problem the market price of the peach decreases due to its improper development .
Because of lack of knowledge about the folio hair the gardeners are unable to make right choice between fungicide and insecticide .
Because of this reason the problem is furiously increasing in the peach producing regions .
It is necessary to pay special attention towards seedy fruits particularly peach in order to bring diversity in gardening in the state .
Uttarakhand is favorable for fruit production because of its natural resources , geographical situation and diversity of environmental organisms .
Peach , plum , apricot etc are grown among the seedy fruits in the state .
Peach is being produced in the districts of Uttarakhand such as Uttarkashi , Tihri , Paudi , Chamoli , Nainital , Champawat etc. .
The fruit contains various kinds of vitamins , minerals and other nutrients in ample amounts which are very beneficial from the point of view of health .
The peach crop gets infected from many diseases and insects from time to time which results in the loss of 30-40 percent production .
Combating the diseases and insects of peach at the proper time can lead to increase in production .
The major diseases of the leaves is the curling disease of peach and the curling of leaves tella by the insects .
The major reason behind the increased production of seedy fruits is the change in climate , because of which the temperature of mountain regions is gradually increasing .
The increasing temperature is becoming unfavorable for the major crop apple grown in the hilly regions .
The reason is favorable conditions for the farming of peach because of climatic change .
Among all the temperate fruits , peach requires the most warm climate .
This specialty will be prove to be beneficial for the present and future of peach crop .
Peach can also be grown successfully in less nutrient elements and less fertile soil .
Folio hair is because of two factors , the first one is fungus and the second is insects .
In such a dilemma the producers are unable to understand that whether they should use fungicide or insecticide to combat this problem .
Peach leaf curl disease - This disease is found everywhere in the world except the warm and dry regions of peach production .
As soon as the new leaves emerge the disease appears because of a fungus named Taphrina deformans .
The affected leaves curl , shrink , squeeze and their section becomes thick .
The color of new leaves is red and purple and the old leaves gets yellow .
Thus the power of the plants become feeble and it has an adverse effect on the fruits .
The fruits are small , discolored , and distorted which wither away very quickly .
When the new leaves emerge , the cool and warm climate is favorable for the diseases .
Thus the intensity of disease keeps changing from one year to another .
The special thing to be noted is also that this disease is found only in peach .
Peach leaf curl aphid - This is the most harmful insect of peach .
Along with peach it also harms almonds , plum , plummy and apricots .
Because of the sucking of rising buds there are curled leaves .
This insect harms the most before and after the arrival of flower .
The life cycle of insect depends upon the climate of the place .
If one looks from the perspective of produce , the producers can face 30-50 percent loss because of this problem .
Because of the small size of the produce it does not provide good price in the market .
Fruits lose most of their qualities which make them unfit for being exported and because of which the producers suffer great loss .
If the fury of the disease is more then it is essential to get a spraying during the pre and post budding phase .
Pests which eat aphid are very beneficial to combat aphid .
The life cycle of these insects is also like aphid whose number increases the most during March and April .
These insects eat baby and adult aphids , but they should be saved from the fungicide and insecticide spray during March and April because it kills the pests .
Lady bird beetle -LRB- Septum Pancetta -RRB- is significant among these pests .
These pests are also helpful in maintaining a balance in nature .
The increase in their number in the garden reduces the use of insecticide , the produced fruits are also of best quality .
By the end of September rainy season reaches its last phase .
With the beginning of October days start becoming shorter , the heat of sun becomes clement and the nights become cooler and during the same time pink winter season begins .
The season standing at its peak of change is significant for both fruits and vegetables but if we make the analysis in an unbiased way then these two months are more significant for the vegetable crops as compared to the fruit crops .
Mangoes : - Clean the land and remove the weeds beneath the trees from the garden during September .
Stop providing water in the gardens after October but keep irrigating the newly planted plants at proper intervals .
Spray -LRB- 2 ml .  l water -RRB- dimethoate if the fury of suet gal silla is seen .
If the malformation problem affects the plants then cut out the malformed bunches during the first week of October and spray 200 p.p.m. naphthalene acidic acid .
Banana : - Pluck and ripen the matured fruits in store during September and make proper arrangements to send them in the market .
The marketing arrangements of the fruits varieties that ripen late should be done in October .
The unwanted leaves should be removed and the garden should be cleaned in October .
A little irrigation shall necessarily be done if required .
The new gardens of -LRB- Litchi chinensis -RRB- shall definitely be planted in the regions where the rainy season prevails till first fortnight of September .
Also put standardized amounts of manure and fertilizers in September .
Guavas : - If the plants are not planted during the rainy season then complete this work in the first fortnight of September .
Keep the gardens weed free .
Sow the plants in nursery prepared through stooling and bunching during July .
Make arrangements for sending the ripened fruits in the market during October and clean the garden by removing weeds .
Put adequate amounts of manure and fertilizers in the garden after harvesting .
Papaya : - The plants prepared in September shall be planted .
In order to prevent from root rotting disease proper drainage system shall be arranged and a mixture of Bordon -LRB- 2.5 percent -RRB- shall be sprayed .
Irrigate the plants planted in October .
Remove the weeds after cleaning the garden .
The flowering process in Plum continues from September til October .
Since the pollen grains are sticky and the pollination is done by bees therefore in order to get good yield of plums , 10 beehives per hectare shall be kept .
With this along with fruits the farmers can get additional profit of honey .
The symptoms of anthracnose can be seen on the leaves of grapes in northern India after the end of monsoon .
Clean the grape gardens in October and keep it free from weeds .
Weeding should be done after little irrigation .
Finish the work of planting new gardens of emblica by September .
Prepare new plants of emblica by patch budding .
The plants prepared through patch budding grow fast and are less affected by insects .
The fury of bark eating insects is the most during September .
The fury of rusting and fruit rotting disease is the most during October .
Make irrigation drains in the gardens of emblica during October .
There is good growth of fruits when irrigated regularly at an interval of 20 days .
The fruits grow in lokat in October , therefore make arrangements for water at proper intervals in the gardens .
Keep the gardens weed free .
If the plants are affected by batosera rapfomekulata then adopt the management techniques explained for other fruit trees .
Almost all the varieties of apples ripe in these two months .
Harvest the fruits during morning and evening according to their color and size .
Irrigate the gardens a little and put standardized amount of manures and fertilizers after harvesting .
In October make arrangements for the harvesting and transportation of the varieties of fruits that ripe lately .
In order to prepare plants that are seedy , the seeds of the fruits should be taken out and sown in nursery .
Irrigate the pear gardens a little after putting standardized amount of manure and fertilizers in September .
Clean the garden in October so as to keep it free from weeds and use folidol powder all around the plant to prevent the plants from root root borer insect .
Winter season is good for growing vegetables .
Except creepers and a few other vegetables most of the vegetables are available during winter .
Majority of the vegetables like cauliflower , chilies , brinjal , tomatoes etc are sown in fields after preparing their plants but some of the vegetables such as carrot , radish , sweet potatoes , garlic , coriander , fenugreek and spinach are directly sown into the fields .
Farmer brothers should begin vegetable plantation by the last week of September .
Precautions should be taken while choosing the right place for nursery .
Irrigate a little during morning and evening with the help of fountain until sprouting takes place .
The farmers and gardeners who have the arrangement of poly house can take the vegetable plants 15-20 days before also .
Potatoes , garlic , carrot , radish , turnip , cauliflower , coriander , fenugreek and spinach are major among the vegetables which are sown directly into the field .
Majority of the farmers sow these vegetables in even beds but these vegetables should always be sown in queues on ridges in order to get good yield .
It makes weed control and other agricultural works easier and also saves the water required for irrigation .
By the end of November the sown plants become ready for transplantation .
Like vegetables , there is a glut of seasonal flowers during winters but since they are temporary , their success depends upon the right time of their plantation and sowing at beds .
The month October is significant for Rose crops .
Pruning should be finished between 15-20 October .
The older stems should be cut using scissor up to 20-25 c.m above the ground .
Right after cutting , fungicide named blaitox-50 should be mixed in 4gm  lit amount of water and applied on the stem wounds .
The new plants of rose can be planted this month .
Sulla grows fast from the roots of the plant after pruning , they should be frequently cut and separated .
Start planting tuberose and gladiolus in the fields from the first fortnight of October .
India is a agriculture dominant country .
Here 60 percent of the population depends upon agriculture .
Agriculture is the basis of livelihood for 90 percent of the rural population .
With the drastic changes taking place currently , agriculture seems to be surrounded by problems .
There are cracks in the soil during summers .
It harms the root of plants .
It is also one of the responsible factors for drying garden .
Global warming is harming agriculture .
Use of coal , petroleum products and natural gas in the world everyday puts two crore tonnes of carbon-Di-oxide gas in the environment .
Consequently the temperature of earth is increasing .
The fall in production in the entire world is seen not because of changes in system but because of high temperature .
High temperature leads to drying and lowers the rate of photosynthesis .
The hollowing hills , drying rivers , dry ponds , barren lands are common scenes in agriculture these days .
Seeing this , the system of farming and gardening should be changed .
We should use each and every drop of water carefully .
Collecting rainy water droplets falling in the field by making a tank like structure is called tanking .
There is excess of water during rainy season and it flows and gets wasted .
There is need to conserve this water through tanking .
Ponds should be dug to conserve this much water .
If tanks of 2 lakh lit capacity are made in the fields then every farmer will become ` water wealthy ` .
Generally even in situations of famine there is good rainfall twice of thrice .
Thus there will be water in the tanks even in famine situations and the farmers won ` t face scarcity of water any year .
Necessary irrigation can be done with this water .
Droplets of water in the gardens are also very effective in conserving water .
In this method water is made available in form of droplets to the plant surroundings through water ducts .
It stops the wastage of water through stream and also stops the loss due to transpiration .
The plants gets water according to its requirements .
There is desirable increase in the growth and production of the plants because of the supply of required amount of water .
The heat of the Sun becomes very sultry during summers .
Heat strokes grip the plants .
In order to save plants from heat stroke they should be thatched locally .
The upper portion of the thatch is tied at one place .
While making the thatch , eastern part is kept open so that the plants get morning sun rays .
Covering the upper layer of earth with thatches and other general things is called mulching .
It is primarily used for conserving humidity .
The soil covered through mulching are relatively cooler which is essential for the good growth and development of the plants .
Other things can be used for mulching .
One should be careful while using green thatches and other mulching because if it is thick it becomes rotten and it leads to rotting near the stems .
The spurt of air during summers is known as storm .
It is essential to save the plants from its grip .
The plants burn because of its effect .
Along side it withers the flowers and fruits of the plants .
In order to prevent them from this long and fast growing trees shall be planted particularly in the north-west direction in the garden .
The queue of air resistant trees shall become significant component of the garden .
Black berry , mangoes , Azadirachta indica , Blackwood , Carambola , Ulmaceae , baken , Indian beech tree , almondette , mulberry etc. trees shall be chosen from this perspective .
The trees should be planted at the ridges of the gardens .
The fruit bearing trees shall be planted at the distance of 5 meters from the air resistant trees .
By making semi circular ridges in spreading plants the farming of fruits can be done with less water .
The water dripped from the plants shall be collected inside the ridge .
This water will do the task of conserving moisture in the dug pit by remaining inside it .
The size of the pit depends upon things such as the amount of rainfall , requirement of water etc. .
Various programs are being run by the government for soil conservation .
The farmers are being encouraged to get the testing of their soil done .
The farmers are being told about the methods of soil testing .
They are being encouraged to use balanced chemical manure and to maintain the fertility of soil .
The attempt of soil conservation had started from the first five year plan , whose effect could be seen from the third five year plan .
The farmers are also being acquainted with the precautions that should be taken during soil testing .
There is also significant work done in conserving soil with the beginning of Mahatma Gandhi guaranteed employment law plan .
Because of the sustenance of farm water in the farm itself , the flow of fertile soil has stopped which is proving to be beneficial for the farmers .
Special effort is being put at land conservation in order to give new dimensions to the development of agriculture in the country .
Many significant efforts are being made by the government towards land conservation to promote agriculture and increase yield .
The conceptual structure of soil conservation activities has changed .
There has been comprehensive reforms in the perceptions of these programs during every five year plan .
It is because of this reason that we are far ahead in terms of cereals .
Now once again there is a unique initiative being taken by the central government towards soil conservation .
The farmers are also being made aware of soil conservation .
How can we use the soil in an appropriate way and how can the soil be conserved .
How can this strength be conserved , all such things are being explained to the farmers by the scientists .
If we want to protect the soil it is essential for us to have knowledge about it .
Soil testing and land testing in agriculture is the chemical test of any sample of soil which gives information about the available nutrients present in the soil .
The plants require 16 nutrient elements to complete their life cycle .
These elements are-carbon , hydrogen , oxygen , nitrogen , phosphorous , potash , calcium , magnesium , zinc , manganese , copper , iron , boron , molybdenum and chlorine .
Using all these elements in balanced quantity can only lead to suitable yield .
The adequate availability of all these elements can only be identified if we regularly get the soil tested .
Just as we get information about the deteriorating condition of an individual ` s body by diagnosing a person , likewise we get to know about the deterioration in the soil by testing it .
Then we remove the elements that lead to the distortions in soil .
The soil sample is taken first for soil testing .
It is essential for the soil sample to represent the entire area .
Therefore , caution must be taken while collecting the farm soil sample .
While taking the Samples the farmer must keep in mind that the trowel , shovel , wood , or plastic scraper should be clean .
The soil sample should be taken in such a way that that it represents the entire farm soil .
Different samples from every section should be taken if there are variations in the growth of crops or color of gardens , if the crops are to be sown separately or there are differences in management .
A single sample can be taken if the situation in all the above farms is similar .
Note that a sample can be taken from more than two hectares .
Sample of soil should not be taken from compost pile , trees , rams , slopes and paths and such places that do not represent the farm .
Do not take the sample from the farm where compost , lime , gypsum and other land reformer has been readily inserted .
Don ` t bring tools and utensils made of metal into use because they contain iron , zinc and copper .
Wherever possible use plastic or wooden tools .
Fertilizers are such chemicals that help in tree & plant growth .
Plants are given fertilizers in two ways - one by putting in the ground then these elements are absorbed by plant roots .
Another by spraying on the leaves .
Thus the leaves exploit them .
The fertilizers supply the essential elements for the plants .
Thus all the elements are essential for the plants .
The excess of any one element is harmful and the scarcity also affects the plants .
Similarly in micro nutrients boron , chlorine , manganese , iron , zinc , copper , molybdenum , selenium etc are also required .
If we provide excess of manure to the plants they become moribund .
Because it can not not bear the excess of any element .
In such a situation due to excess of associated elements , the soil attains the state of alkaline , acidic etc. on the other hand the plants also become dead .
The farmers therefore have to bear dual loss .
Therefore a farmer should use only that much manure in his farm which is required by the concerned crop .
After the beginning of Mahatma Gandhi guaranteed employment plan , various programs run for soil conservation have been geared up and their consequences are also visible .
Not only street construction but through ridges also the flow of water is restrained .
With this where at one place the farm water is held in the farm itself at other place soil erosion has also stopped .
With this the fertile soil is unable to reach the river crossing another farm .
But the farmers have been benefited with the ridges being made in every village under MANREGA .
At one place the fertile soil of the farm is not eroding , at other place because of the withheld water in the farm , water level has increased .
Thus this plan has not only provided employment to the people but significant work has also been done in the direction of soil conservation .
Efforts are being made to make the sterile soil fertile with green manure .
Therefore hemp was sown in the farm which was cultivated after they became approximately three feet long .
Entire crop has been merged in the soil .
All the nutrients in the farm have revived due to cultivation after rains .
Pressing hemp crop in the farm helps potato crop .
The agriculture scientists of France have detected that for the development of plants only three elements nitrogen , phosphorus and potash are largely required .
According to them if these three elements are provided to the plants then there will be good growth of the plants and the yield shall also be good .
Green revolution began in India and Asian countries after industrial revolution .
During this time the chemical and insecticide control done in abroad were considered .
They were also used in India .
It was profitable .
After this gradually the phase of chemical manures began .
The chariot of agricultural development progressing incessantly for four decades has stopped at such a trio-crossroad from where it seems difficult to step forward .
The farmer struggling from the problem of stability in farm production since 2006 is now searching for the way to take forward this chariot .
The country has undoubtedly become independent in cereal production .
It is remarkable that in the initial phase of green revolution our lands only lacked nitrogen and phosphorus , but there has been considerable increase in the farm production by using advanced seeds , irrigated water , and fertilizers containing nitrogen and phosphorus .
But there has been decrease in other nutrients in the soil particularly potassium , zinc and sulfur due to incessant exploitation of other nutrient elements .
Now at a large scale there is confirmation of lack of copper , iron , manganese etc. along with boron .
In dense farming , lack of extensive sulfur is proving to be responsible for stability in farm production .
Accordingly there is significant increase in the growth of crops by using sulfur fertilizers .
Till now the farmer friends do not have right knowledge regarding the increasing lack of nutrients in the crop & land and its ill effects on soil health .
Not removing these shortcomings has lead to low rate of produce .
The limited use of only nitrogen and phosphorus fertilizers has proved to be harmful for soil health .
In order to get high quality profitable yield it is necessary to provide nutrients and right dose to the crops .
Such a soil fertility map should be prepared which can foresee the lack of multi-nutrients in just a single sight .
Even today nitrogen , phosphorus and potassium are recommended by soil testing laboratories .
The subsidiary and micro nutrients are not recommended even after extensive scarcity and neither are they tested by these laboratories .
In such a condition it is quite natural to put a question mark on the relevance of recommendations based on soil testing .
There is need to bring drastic changes in this .
Consequently there will be relevant reforms in the production capacity of the land .
The basic goal of this project is to treat the soil health -LRB- maintain fertility and reviving declining quality , stability of production etc. -RRB- repairing soil through increasing production and desirable increase in farmer ` s income .
The significant achievements of this project started in the 16 villages of Bighapur development section of Unnaav district are as follows .
The figures of fundamental survey have made it apparent that the density of village crop and production of the country and state is even less than average .
Therefore there is pretty good scope of increase in crop production and income of the farmers .
Extensive lack of nitrogen , phosphorus , potassium , sulfur and zinc was confirmed in the results of soil testing .
It is obvious that management of balanced and effective nutrients is required for restoring soil health and increasing production .
Soil health is the axis of agricultural development .
Organized management of nutrient efforts are proving to be successful in the villages of project regions .
Huge program has been initiated to encourage `` vermi compost `` for soil restoration .
For absolute success of the program representative farmers were trained for a week in January in `` Shantikunj `` , Haridwar .
Intensive and successful effort of preparing vermi compost has been done in every 16 villages by taking earthworms of competent species .
Special effort was made to increase the area under pulses crops in order to increase the fertility of the soil whose meaningful results are now before us .
There has been significant improvement in the health of soil along with increase in productivity of Pulses by increasing the crop area and production of pulses .
During kharif season 248 crop exhibition were conducted on farmers ` fields on - black gram , early Tur , sesame , hybrid corn , hybrid rice , hybrid sorghum and rapeseed .
There has been 39 to 76 percent increase in the productivity of various crops as compared to the farming system .
There are signs of significant yield increase in the performances of wheat in Rabi , gram , mustard , potato , sugarcane and vegetables .
Under `` CIP `` program improved high yielding crop varieties  hybrids were distributed at large scale with which there was significant increase in crop productivity .
It is remarkable that with meaningful increase in pulses ` and oil seed crops area there has been 21 in 74 percent increase in their productivity .
Including pulses in crop cycle has not only increased production of pulses but it also has a favorable effect on soil health .
Crop density of villages in the project area increased from 250 to 150 per cent .
There is serious problem of termites in the project area .
Farmers are being provided -LRB- Integrated Paste Management -RRB- related scientific information for getting rid off other well insects where information concerning - Seed treatment management , pest - disease management , chemical and biological methods of weed control etc. are being conveyed .
Looking at the present scenario it is essential to prevent the soil from being polluted so that the fertility of soil is not harmed .
The use of biological fertilizers are proving to be profitable for good production of crops .
Using organic fertilizers in agriculture must reduce dependency on indiscriminate use of chemical fertilizers .
It will also decrease the polluted soil .
Thus there are ample possibilities for using organic fertilizers along with chemical fertilizers to get good quality crops of high yield .
Organic fertilizers are readily available at low cost and their use is also very easy .
Organic fertilizers can be easily used with chemical fertilizers .
Organic fertilizer fixes the nitrogen present in the atmosphere -LRB- 78 percent -RRB- and makes it available to the crops .
By using organic fertilizers there is 10 to 25 percent increase in yield of different crops .
Their use increases early germination of seeds and there is increase in the number of spurts in the plants .
There can also be decrease in chemical fertilizers with their use .
Organic fertilizer produce the growth hormone -LRB- Rhizosphere -RRB- around the roots of plants which has a favorable effect on plant growth .
Using organic fertilizers helps to protect the environment .
Farmers get benefits in cost reduction and helps in Economic gains .
Rhizobium Bio Fertilizer : Rhizobium is the mostly used organic fertilizer .
Various pulse crops require different Rhizobium bacteria to provide nitrogen to crops .
This species of bacteria primarily fix nitrogen from the atmosphere in pulse crops .
These bacteria create bales in the roots of pulse crops .
Rhizobium bacteria lives in these bales .
Rhizobium bacteria absorbs independent nitrogen present in the atmosphere and provide them to the pulse crops .
Nowadays the use of Rhizobium bacteria fertilizers is increasing .
Organic fertilizers Azotobacter : Azotobacter lives freely around the roots of plants and soil and convert atmospheric nitrogen into nutrients and provide them to the plants .
Azotobacter can be used in all non-pulses crops .
Azotobacter also make hormones that increase plant yields , which are helpful in the development of the crop .
There is 10-20 per cent increase in crop yield with its use .
Azospirillum Organic Fertilizers : Azospirillum organic fertilizers provide nitrogen to the plants .
These organic fertilizers are beneficial for those crops which are grown in warm and damp climate .
The nitrogen needs of plants can be partially completed with this organic fertilizer .
It is suitable for millet , sorghum , maize , rice , sugarcane , cotton , banana and other fruits and vegetables crops .
Caesious algae -LRB- cyanobacteria -RRB- : These are also known as blue-green moss .
It is approximately stabilizes 20-25 kg . Nitrogen  hec every year from the atmosphere .
It is found very useful for the crops that require more water .
It can be used 7 days after transplanting paddy at the rate of 10 . Kg  hec .
Caesious algae make their food be the sun ` s energy .
Its major species are Nostak , Tolipothiriks , Anaveena etc. .
Azolla organic fertilizer is mainly recommended for the crops .
It makes green sheet over the water , which later becomes gray-red colored .
Primarily in India the fern named Anabina Pinnata is found .
Soil treatment through the use of Azolla has been found to be highly effective .
The crop plants are at the risk of being harmed if they are used before planting or at the time of transplanting .
Mycorrhiza : - Vesicular Ar vascular Mycorrhiza which is a fungus , also falls into the category of organic fertilizers .
Prolonged cultivation decreases certain elements in the soil .
The roots of crops reach only up to a certain depth .
Mycorrhiza is very useful in providing nutrients from the lower surfaces of soil to the plants .
Nutrients such as phosphorus and zinc can be easily accessible to the plants to the faraway places .
Mycorrhiza meets its nutritional needs by doing partnership with the roots of plants .
They also increase the absorption of water by plants .
They are suitable for various fruit plants , coarse grains , peanuts and soybeans etc. .
Seed treatment method : This is the most easy and approachable method of organic fertilizers .
Plant root treatment method - This method is appropriate for paddy and vegetable crops that are transplanted .
Bulb treatment method - In this method the bulbs of sugarcane , ginger , yam , potatoes etc crops are treated through organic fertilizers before transplantation .
The following measures should be taken while using organic fertilizers .
The organic fertilizers should be protected from sun rays and warm wind .
The organic fertilizers shall be chosen according to the varieties of crops .
The packets of the organic fertilizers shall be opened at the time of using them .
Organic fertilizers should never be used with chemical fertilizers , pesticides and weedicides .
Rizca is a very nutritional crop of green fodder .
Therefore Rizca -LRB- Lursun -RRB- is also known as the queen of fodder .
Feeding this green fodder to the animals provides them sufficient amount of protein and other elements .
The farming of rizca is done in all the semi temperate and temperate parts of the country .
Their produce can vary according to water and irrigation facility .
There is less production in the places that are dry and dependent on rains .
Rizca -LRB- Lursan -RRB- is the oldest crop among fodder crops .
This was first identified by the humans .
Its roots and rizobium bacteria associated with it are most significant for the success of this crop .
On the basis of these organisms the plants use the atmospheric nitrogen .
Rizca crop is a multi-yearly fodder crop which gives once sown yields for 4-6 years .
It gets affected by various diseases and insects on the places with high rainfall .
Rizca can be grown in any kind of soil but its Ph value should be towards neutral or alkaline .
The fertility of the soil decreases in acidic land and if the ph value is very less the plants die after they start growing .
The most appropriate soil for this is sandy-loamy or loamy soil .
Its growth also decreases in clay soil .
By the way Rizca can also be grown in rocky land .
There is lack of good varieties of Rizca in India .
Apart from this a Australian species hunter river has proved to be the best for such regions .
This variety is hoar frost and excess chill suppressor .
Its roots are long and go deep inside the land .
Its farming is done in all the parts of Kashmir .
A local tribe which is known as ` Laddakh `` in the frozen parts of Laddakh is found to be the best .
Their yield and long lasting qualities are found to be good for other species .
For the good growth of crops it is essential to remove the weeds from the farm before sowing .
High quality seeds should be used for sowing .
These seeds should be free from weeds and other elements .
Rizca shall be sown like bersim in the irrigated regions .
The seeds should not be too deep inside the farm .
Rizca can also be sown in queues at a distance of 15-20 cms . through seed drill .
The rizca seeds should be treated with bacteria fertilization before sowing if required .
More potassium and phosphorus are required for the good yield of Rizca crop .
Application of phosphorus is required more for rizca .
The plants develop dryness suppressant power by using phosphorus .
Also the number of nitrogen collecting glands and their capacity increases .
After 35-40 days rizca plants themselves become eligible for collecting atmospheric nitrogen .
If the rotten manure and compost of cow dung are not available then 50-80 kgs . of phosphorus per hectare are essential .
Mixing full amount of nitrogen and phosphorus in the farm before sowing is good .
The Lime that is good for agriculture should be added to the acidic soil 6 months before sowing .
No irrigation is required during rainy season .
Good water drainage of rizca farm is significantly required .
Where ever possible before of after sowing weeds shall be removed from the farm .
Weeds can be controlled by running local plough on the crops sown in queues .
In most of the regions the major enemy of rizca is supposed to be mistletoe .
It is a parasitic and single season weed .
This weed grows as a leafless yellow plant .
After 10-12 days of growth it breaks its contact with land and falls on rizca plants .
Gradually rizca plant gets covered by their various small branches .
Its rises in the form of a mat .
The rizca plant receives sun rays with difficulty but most of the carbohydrate start decreasing by mistletoe .
At last rizca plants die .
Gradually the entire farm becomes rizca free .
No good chemical is available in India for its control .
The major insects that harm rizca are-rizca caterpillar , gram caterpillar , semilooper , rizca weevil , thrips , aphid , red caterpillar and green plant bug .
The green farm should be cut as soon as the insects attack the crop .
It reduces the fury of insects .
In order to prevent from semilooper the crop should be cut at the time when leaves are getting sun rays .
In order to control caterpillars 5 percent powder of B.H.C shall be sprayed on the drains of irrigation and at the ridges of farms which are the major breeding places of this insect .
It kills new born insects .
If possible the barren land where this insect is found shall be treated with some appropriate insecticide .
The green fodder should not be fed to the animals for two weeks after the spray of any insecticide .
The major diseases that harm rizca are downy mildew and rizca insect .
The leaves of the plant get damaged because of the disease .
As soon as the crops start getting affected by the disease the fodder should be cut .
The attack of the plants can also be prevented by spraying one percent of bordon mixture .
Rizca insects attack during March-April .
In order to prevent the fury of this disease the diseased leaves shall be cut before falling on the ground .
Along side disease suppressant varieties should be used .
The rizca is cut according to the carbohydrates in the plants .
The sustenance of carbohydrates and use in plants is done through a special program .
The harvesting of rizca in temperate sections is done in a completely different way as compared to the managed plain sections .
Plants bear cold without any harm if the harvesting of rizca is done during September in the temperate sections .
Energy is procured with the help of carbohydrates stored in the roots .
In north India 8-9 and in south India 10-12 mowing of rizca can be done by putting more manure .
With good management system rizca crop can continuously provide fodder for 5-6 years .
While green vegetables are required to keep healthy , fresh fruits should also be consumed .
Amongst fruits if we use pomegranate , most of the diseases shall themselves get away .
That is why it is said that a pomegranate has the capacity to keep away 100 diseases .
It is such a fruit which gives us strength and its branches support us as a crutch when we get old .
The oil of pomegranate is also extracted and all Ayurvedic medicines are made .
It is effective in keeping away various diseases .
It is full of medicinal values .
Pomegranate contains abundant amount of beneficial protein , carbohydrates , fiber , vitamins and minerals .
The outer peel of pomegranate is as much effective as its juice .
The peel of pomegranate is used as tooth powder after drying .
When the pomegranate peel is individually mixed with different things and consumed it keeps away from many diseases .
The researchers of Edinburgh university have found that pomegranate not only reduces high blood pressure but also decreases the fats that gets accumulated across the stomach .
Both of them are major symptoms of heart diseases and heart attack .
The botanical name of pomegranate is punica granatum .
It is red colored .
It has hundreds of red but juicy granules .
Although it is known with different names at different places .
Pomegranate trees are beautiful and of small sizes .
Its bushy tree is 3 to 5 meters tall .
Its fruit ripens only at the tree , not after being plucked .
Pomegranate is found in all the warm places of the world .
Although pomegranate is such a fruit which is easily available in the markets even where it does not grow .
Instead of eating its juice is mostly utilized .
It is also consumed as salad .
If we look at the history of pomegranate we see that the Romans detected it first .
The inmates of Rome called pomegranate as the apple with more seeds .
The researchers believe that this fruit is 300 years old .
Increase your memory - Memory becomes weak at old age .
Regularly drinking a glass of pomegranate juice removes this problem .
After an age the elderly people in the family are likely to suffer from Alzheimer disease .
The likelihood of this disease can be reduced by regularly consuming pomegranate .
Giving a glass of pomegranate juice to the elderly members of the family and children preparing for exams proves very effective .
Pomegranates fights with blood circulation related diseases .
It reduces high blood pressure .
Drink a glass of pomegranate regularly for a week if there is swelling in the intestine .
It will stop the swelling of the intestines .
Also other diseases related to the stomach will be put to an end .
Its regular use reduces the pain of joints .
Regular use of pomegranate reduces the effect of cancer .
Various types of elements found in pomegranate lowers the rate of aging of the body .
Aging can be stopped by regularly consuming 100 grams of pomegranate .
Routinely use of pomegranate also stops facial wrinkles .
It also maintains the sheen of the face .
Regular use of pomegranate also improves the skin color .
Drinking a glass of pomegranate juice is effective for Anemia complaints .
It removes the lack of hemoglobin .
Regularly drinking a glass of pomegranate juice kills the worms of stomach .
Pomegranate is very useful for someone who is suffering from old cough .
Ketchup is also made from the juice of pomegranate .
The sauce thus prepared by mixing other fruits can be used as jam .
It works as tonic for growing children .
The wood of the pomegranate tree is very strong .
Generally its wood is used to make sticks that are used while walking .
Its branches are thinly chiseled .
There is significant place of agriculture and agriculture related in Indian economy .
This sector provides highest employment to the population of the country .
Although adequate changes could be seen in the nature of agriculture in recent years .
Now , at the place of traditional farming , commercial farming is becoming popular .
Approximately two-third of people of the one billion population of the country are dependent on farming but the farm production is same which it was 10 years back .
There is multiple increase in the price of manures , seeds , medicine , equipments , electricity etc. used in farming but there is no increase in the prices of cereals and farm produce in their proportion .
There is lack of technologically efficient human resources in modern farming .
The economy of India is based on farming and approximately 12 crore village families are dependent upon that .
The land is limited , the production is not reaching up to desirable level .
The farmers have started purchasing high quality seeds , manure and insecticide so that high quality farm produce can be produced with which the cost of crop has increased .
Despite this they can not compete imported crops like oil seeds and cotton .
Agriculture is a monsoon dependent gamble and now it has become a market dependent gamble .
In India majority of the population associated with farming and other works related to it is illiterate .
The government has sufficient details of the problems of farmers .
There is acute need to revive farming sector .
Farming is not just the machine to make food but a basic livelihood of around two-third population of the country ` s population .
If they are in problem the social structure will collapse .
Today in various states of India , multinational companies are taking field from the farmers on lease and making them work on their farmland itself .
Today there has been adequate inventions in agriculture and related activities such as milk production , sheep rearing , silk production etc. in the world but its benefits are far away from the farmers now .
The reason is that the students educated in agriculture and related auxiliary activities are not being appropriate opportunities by the government to work in this sector .
That is why the multinational companies are making their monopoly in this sector by selling the seeds to common farmers at very high prices and by appointing the technically expert people so that the technical experience of these people remains restricted to these companies .
Like industries , today agriculture sector needs help in every sector .
The farmers should be given scientific training about the solutions of electricity , water , manure , seeds , bad weather , worsening soil and dirty water .
While the number of farmers who are being trained today is negligible .
More and more number of agricultural universities should be opened in India .
Free education related to agriculture should be provided .
It will be a pretty effective move towards stopping unemployment and migration towards cities if educated youngsters are appointed in this sector by educating them about agriculture and related activities .
And it will prove to be a significant contribution towards the prosperity of farmers and country .
The irony is that in agriculture dominant country the condition of farming and farmers very deplorable .
Despite being the means of livelihood for 75 % population the farmers caught in the web of debts are compelled to commit suicides .
It is subject to think over for the country .
Agriculture sector is suffering from many problems .
There is need for comprehensive changes in agriculture policies and serious mediation for its upliftment and problems .
These days every big industrial family of the country is entering in agriculture market sector .
Godrej and Hindustan lever were there from before but now ITC and Reliance are also trying to come .
During the same time there is news in the newspapers that since the last 10 years more than 1.5 lakh farmers have committed suicide because of the debts related to agriculture .
Many factors are responsible for this situation one amongst them is the rising prices of farming products after production .
Since farmers sell their products as raw good without processing , the part of the money that they get from the consumers is very less .
A new component has been added in the company act 2002 where the producers can together create companies .
Only those members will be there in the manufacturing company who are engaged in the activity .
The interpretation of production has also been done which includes farming , animal rearing , gardening , wild products , beehive rearing , arts and crafts and indigenous industries and other production .
The first manufacturing company established in Kerala was Indian biological farmer manufacturing company which is situated in Aluwa .
The farmers have to do the farming with biological system in order to be the member of this company .
Along with providing information to the members about farming this company also provides investments .
The manufacturing company helps the farmer members in selling their products .
Vanilla India named manufacturing company was established by a non governmental organization ` Inferum ` of Kerala .
Vanilla is an element that gives flavor and taste to the food items and is mostly used in cakes and ice cremes .
Its market rate keeps fluctuating because of which the farmers have suffered loss for the last few years .
The Vanilla manufacturing company has directly done a deal with the big vanilla using industries of the country so that it completely benefits its members .
The Madhya Pradesh government has established 17 manufacturing companies with which poor farmers can be benefited .
These companies are efficiently doing works such as food grain , oil seeds , poultry rearing etc. .
The milk dairy which was closed in Junagadh which was closed has again been run by making it a manufacturing company .
Pradhan named non governmental organization in Jharkhand is establishing a company of silk weavers with which the weavers can directly sell their products in country and abroad .
Two companies have been established by the spices board in the karbi Anglong district of Assam , one among them will produce turmeric and the other will produce chilies .
All the farmers of both the companies are tribal people and their entire products will be sold in foreign market .
Fab India is one such company which helps the small industries of the village weaver and artisans by selling their articles in cities .
The amounts is more when the members assemble the products and it also increases the ability of the producer to control the rate in market .
The company that buys the products from manufacturing company gets right kind of product at the right time according to its requirement .
Small farmers and artisans of our villages will be benefited if the manufacturing companies spreads in the country like this .
Thus agriculture will also be profitable , whereby not only the farms will be green but it will also bring back smile on the faces of the farmers .
Water is the most essential element for agricultural production .
The plants consistently need it during their life .
It definitely affects photosynthesis , respiration , accumulation and availability of minerals in any form .
The water shortage or its excess directly and indirectly affects production and quality of plant growth and its development .
With the rational use of water available , we can multiply increase the crop yields by increasing the area under irrigation .
Thus our dependence on cereals imports ended and we could reach the condition of exporting certain crops .
The main subject of concern for the farmers is availability of water .
Most of the agriculture in India are more or less dependent on monsoon rains .
But it is entirely uncertain when it will rain , how much and where will it be .
It can only be speculated .
Sometimes because of no rainfall drought condition arises at times of high rainfall , flood originates .
There has been adequate increase in the amount of irrigated agriculture during the last century , similarly the amount of use of water in agricultural works has also massively increased .
In most of the Asian countries , 80-90 % of their water sources are used for the irrigation of farm .
The situation is no different in India .
More water will be required to meet the increasing food grain demands of the growing population .
By increasing the production of water it is meant that more amount of food grain is produced using per unit amount of water .
Thus where at one hand it will get rid of the shortage of water on the other hand for human and environment water will be available at large .
For efficient water resources management special attention must be paid on the following -
The water utilized by the crop is seen in context of the used water and the rate of evaporation .
The requirement of water depends upon the nature and development of crop ` s stage and the climate .
Different quantities of water is required for various crops in a single season .
The crops that are sown in rainy season come under Kharif crops .
Usually this time is from June till September .
It includes crops like paddy , maize , soya bean , groundnut and cotton .
Rabi crops are cold weather crops .
Their duration is supposed to last from October to March .
They consist of wheat , gram , peas , mustard crops etc. .
Normally the crops require irrigation before the moisture content of soil around the roots becomes less than 50 % .
The quantity of water required for Paddy cultivation is different in different circumstances .
For the crops to be ready in a short time , high water level of the soil , for the kharif crop , more heat and moisture is required .
There is a tradition of soaking the paddy crop in 5cm water for the entire period in the lower plain fields .
It is the ideal irrigation condition in those areas .
Wheat - it requires 4 to 5 times of irrigation .
The wheat crop requires low temperature and less moisture as compared to the paddy crops .
The total geographical area of India is about 328 million hectare and the average annual rainfall is about 112 centimeters .
The total estimated rainfall in the country about 3,700,000 million cubic meters .
The water flowing on the surface and the ground water seeping inside the land are two important sources of water for agriculture .
Both of them together make the water cycle of the earth .
There are various rivers of different sizes in our country .
The irrigation scheme should be formulated in such a way that the water of these rivers can be used in low rainfall .
Several efforts are being made in the direction of making optimum utilization of the water available on the surface -
The water storage capacity is being extended by building dams on major rivers .
The construction of contact canals has proved to be a revolutionary step in this direction .
The areas which were almost barren so far due to the absence of water has today turned green .
A large section of Gujarat and Rajasthan being nourished by the water of Narmada Canal are its objective examples .
Systematic use of water from natural lakes , canals , ponds etc. - The maximum use water can be done for agricultural work by maintaining the pre existing lakes , canals and ponds in a proper way .
The farmers growing different kinds of crops require different quantities of water at different times for irrigation .
The farmers require water when the crops need water .
Ground water and wells are efficient in fulfilling this requirement of the crops .
After the requirement is fulfilled the ground water is utilized in irrigation etc. by traditional instruments or lifting through modern techniques .
Wherever river and canal water is not able to reach irrigation is only possible through wells etc. .
Many techniques of raising and utilizing the ground water are prevalent such as wells , Persian wells , tube wells etc. .
Majority of the agricultural land conventionally remains dependent on monsoon rains .
Apart from rain water many techniques of irrigation are adopted .
In the beginning water was brought from one place to another and raised up from depth only by manpower .
With the development of electricity and diesel run motors in the midst of 20th century , it was possible to raise ground water from depth .
With the use of motors it became possible to use more water in less time .
Many techniques are prevalent for irrigation .
Some of the prevalent techniques of irrigation are as follows -
Flood technique - It is the mostly used technique for irrigation .
In this technique manpower or motor pump are used to bring water from a source and drifted in the farm .
This source could be well , Persian well , lake , canal etc. .
This is the most easy and cheap technique of irrigation .
Drop technique - In this technique water is poured near the roots of the plants with the help of porous plastic pipes laid in the farm .
It requires very less discharge of water .
This technique proves to be useful in the farming of fruits .
The requirement of the amount of water for crop is that which is essential for its ripening in the given time .
It includes the water loss through evaporation water used to prepare the field .
By controlling water and its uniform use higher yields can be received at low cost .
It is required to determine the phases of irrigation for stopping the misuse of water .
Putting required amount of water in the farm at the proper time is said to be good irrigation .
Such a time should be chosen for irrigation when the temperature of the ground is normal .
It is beneficial to irrigate the field early morning during very cold weather .
The 39 % of available fresh water in America is used for the irrigation of crops .
Because of the relative extinctions it is essential to make rational use of water .
Therefore it becomes essential to choose most effective and sparing technique of irrigation .
The flow of water is from an altitude to a lower place .
If the farm is uneven the water will stay at any place and will not be able to reach at some places .
Therefore it is necessary that the farm is made even before sowing so that the irrigated water reaches equally at all the corners .
The water is poured at fixed intervals in controlled supply .
With this the land gets appropriate time to absorb water and water is not wasted .
Water supply can be controlled with artificial resources while irrigation but it is not simple during rainy season .
Adequate arrangements shall be done for such apprehensions also while making the farm even .
The drains and the border ridges for irrigating the field should be prepared in such a way that extra water flows out of the field during irrigation .
Generally a large part of the water used in irrigation flows through the surface of the farm or uselessly stays there .
The farmers can collect this extra water by building wells and ponds in the slope of their farm .
This water can again be used for irrigation through pump if needed .
The rainy water shall be stored in these ponds , wells etc and will be available for longer times .
Generally four months from June till September are considered to be rainy .
For the rest of the eight months the concern over the arrangement of water is natural .
Therefore it is necessary to store the rainy water for future use .
Many conventional solutions such as ponds , dams , lakes , underground storage etc. are prevalent for storing rainy water .
All these sources suffuse with water during rainy season and proves quite useful in other seasons .
The problem of water is ever increasing and we should be careful before it takes a spooky turn .
Existence of a pond around the houses in West Bengal is still considered to be a symbol of prosperity .
These ponds become loaded with water during rains and fulfill water related requirements at the rest of the time .
Our dependence on ground water source is increasing day by day .
Farmers have started trusting the ground water more with surface water resources because it is available on demand .
Irrigation through tube well is quite prevalent in states like Punjab , Haryana and Uttar Pradesh .
With this there was no scarcity of water even with low rainfall .
But one consequence of this was that because of excessive exploitation the ground water level of these regions is decreasing day by day .
Earlier where we could get water at 50 feet depth , today it is not even available at 80 feet .
The concept of culturing ground water artificially is new .
It is our responsibility to culture ground water .
There is need to drive a campaign in this direction whether it is a city or agricultural land .
There is a need to educate and aware the farmers in this direction in the village regions .
In the coming times the biggest challenge before us would be to increase the production of food grains with less use of water .
With the judicious and planned use of water more agricultural land can be brought under irrigation .
Increasing the production of water in agricultural works is a significant work .
Therefore it should be the duty of every farmer and the society at large to contribute by making the best use of a single drop of water and it can only be possible through skillful water management .
Flower production or flower agriculture is the scholastic horticulture science related to gardening and plantation agricultural skill and production of ornamental plants which also include flower industry .
The flower production crops include budding plants , flowery plants , foliose plants or domestic plants and cut flowers .
The flowers are not only beautiful to watch but can also be a good business if grown in large numbers .
There is a great scope of earning , employment , and export for flower production industry in India .
Flower production is extending as a new emerging industry after the fast spread of information technology and biotechnology .
Our country has fertile and favorable weather for farming which is very favorable for various flowers and that is why India is speedily emerging as a big exporter of flower manufacturing products .
Taking benefits from the support of the government many flower manufacturing units were established in India and flowers are grown and exported to developed countries .
Most of them were situated around Mumbai , Bangalore and Delhi and the concerned technical information was gathered from Dutch and Israel counselor .
Karnataka is the biggest producer in flower manufacture in India where 75 % of the total flower manufacturing takes place .
This state has the most region for modern cut flowers and 40 flower manufacturing and export units also .
The first and the only flower auction center of the country is also situated in Karnataka .
Flower manufacturing is seen as a fast growing industry in India .
Commercial flower manufacturing is becoming a significant from the point of view of export .
With new seed policy the import of international sub varieties of sowing materials has become possible .
The Indian government gives reliefs such as income tax break and import tax to the potential exporting companies .
Agricultural and processed food products export development authorization -LRB- APEDA -RRB- , the organization responsible for export encouragement and development in India provides some subsidies such as cold storage , pre cooling units , refrigeration vehicles , plant homes and air commodity rent .
Thus it is an attractive trade .
More than half flower manufacturing units are situated in south chiefly Karnataka , Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu .
Apart from this quite a large area is also engaged in flower manufacturing in West Bengal , Maharashtra and Rajasthan .
The demand for cut flowers has also increased in the native markets .
The reason is increasing religious feelings .
While at one time jasmine flowers were used for worshiping , today various kinds of flowers are used in temples such as Dutch roses , flower bunches and orchids .
Cut flowers with long stems and pot flowers for ornamentation are being used today but their use is increasing very fast .
Because of the western influence Valentines day and other festivals have become popular which will encourage flower industry in native markets .
Flowers are becoming the inseparable part of every society whether it is weddings or social or political festival .
The experts believe that this 900 crore rupee industry has great potential for increasing the total native and overseas sale .
22 lakh farmers are directly engaged in native flower manufacturing market .
The native market is increasing with 40 % every year .
The central government is encouraging this sector for the last two years after identifying it which has lead to good progress .
With 37 % increase during 2005-06 commercial year the export of flowers became 305 crores .
The flower manufacturing in India for export shifted from traditional flowers to cut flowers .
Germany , France , Italy , U. K , U.S.A and Japan etc. are major exporters of alive plants , bulbs and cut flowers .
Netherlands had firmed its feet in world flower manufacturing export .
Its market component was 70 % .
India has 30 million dollar component which makes only 0.30 % .
Because of different agricultural seasons in India it is possible to grow many kinds of flowers including temperate flowers .
Adequate water , low wages and nearness to Japan , Russia , South-eastern Asia and Middle-east countries is a favorable condition .
For the storage of export products cold storage facility has been arranged at the entry and exit of International Airports .
The agricultural ministry has established 11 ideal flower manufacturing units and 2 big centers and 20 tissue culture units .
Many high technique units have refinance assistance facility at reasonable base rate provided by NABARD .
The Indian government has demanded from the European communities that they should reduce the prevailing import rate at Indian cut flowers .
The government is considering to give the relief on import tax of the required materials for plant homes and tissue culture laboratories .
The nodal agency APEDA has helped in establishing 6 farming export regions and export dedicated enclave for flower manufacturing .
Flower auction centers are being setup in the metropolitan cities now .
Where facilities both for export and trade and price determination of various kinds of flowers in the native markets are available .
Apart from this APEDA is running market ease center outside India in Holland which is helping Indian producers for export in Europe .
By 2010 the Indian flower manufacturing export is expected to be 700 crore rupees as opposed to the projected 1000 crore rupees .
The contribution of India in world flower business is around 12 billion US dollars which is very less as per its scope .
India ` s flower manufacturing industry is emerging as a big power in the world due to the fast growing retail market , for being the biggest consumer and infinite opportunities for growth .
India has tremendous prospects for the export of flower manufacturing products because of its power , shortcomings and opportunities .
Since the beginning of civilization flowers have been significant in our lives .
Flowers-the symbol of beauty and peace are also beneficial from commercial point of view .
Netherlands , Italy , Germany and Japan are leading not only in production of flowers but also its consumption .
Flower Industries strengthening their roots in countries like Columbia,Costa-Rica , Chile , Kenya , Rhodesia , Moscow , South Africa etc. .
There is great demand for rose , gladiolus and tuberose in the country .
Roses from Kashmir and tuberose from Kolkata are sent to big cities of the country .
Jasmine flowers are being exported from South India to the Gulf countries .
There is fast growing demand in the cities for flowers such as orchid , jarbera , bird of paradise and daisy .
There is great demand in the country for ornamental plants such as araucaria , dieffenbachia .
The chief factor responsible for flower industry emerging as a big trade today in the world is the revolution in the amplification of flowery plants .
The trade of cut flowers is growing very fast in many countries .
The micro amplification of flowery plants is easy as compared to the trees .
Chrysanthemum is an attractive flower which is known as chrysanthemum coronerium .
The variability in its color and shapes make it a significant flower .
Gerbera is a significant plant of astracy family .
There is great demand for it in various countries and India due to its suitability to get planted in cut flowers and pots .
The amplification of gerbera is done in a traditional way through clump segmentation .
Though the multiplication rate through this technique is very less .
Adequate amount of sowing materials are required for doing the farming of gerbera on commercial level for which micro amplification is an effective solution .
The micro amplification of gerbera can be done through various explant -LRB- modified leader shoot , flower buds , capitulum , leaves , torus and inflorescence .
The micro amplification through capitulum is easy as compared to modified leader shoot because it is sterilized and secondly the plants does not get destroyed by doing tissue culture through this technique .
For its amplification the inflorescence is plucked and the capitulum is cut .
Then cut them in small pieces and plant them in media .
10-12 sprouts could be seen in some days from which plants can easily be prepared through root production .
Adjustment according to the situation is the most integral part of micro amplification .
The plants are adjusted according to the situation when the roots arise by putting them in Peat : Perlite in the ratio -LRB- 1:1 -RRB- .
The can be adjusted according to the situation even in colopea , sphagnum moss etc. .
In the common language ` Millet ` is known as thick grains .
The utilization of ` coarse grains ` is based on the Hindi translation of coarse grains .
All of them are members of gramineae family like other paddy crops .
It is definitely true about these grains that the quantity of thick fibers in the grain is more which reduces their digestibility .
Alongside some of their grains contain multiple layers of chaff .
For example the Chaina grain contains seven layers of chaff and it is necessary to remove the layers before consumption by beating them .
Having layers is an ultimate excellent symptom because the fury of its germ infection during storage is less and its safe storage duration is sufficiently long .
It would be appropriate to call them ` small grain crops ` .
There is not an unwanted apparition of the lack of nutrition or thickness of these significant grains with this word .
These crops are mostly grown on less fertile land uncertain and scarce rainfall regions by marginal or poor section of the farmer community .
They are considered to be the fundamental crops of dry regions , marginal lands and the regions affected by famine .
The production stability of dry farming areas is based on small grains .
The lifespan of some small grains such as gram is quite short therefore they can be grown as a temporary crop in between the available period of two major crops .
The names of these grains are different in different places and countries .
For example , Millet is known as Kate tail millet or pencilaria or mundsforage in America .
Like Millet is called as baajra or baajri in north India , Kambu in TamilNadu and as Sajja in Karnataka .
These grains are primarily grown in the dry parts of less fertile lands .
The temperature at all these regions is high and the only means of water availability is rains that is to say irrigation facilities are almost none .
The level of fertility of the land growing coarse grains is approximately the minimum .
The level of biological elements is generally low in all these types of soils this is to say that the quantity of nitrogen is less and other minimum necessary physical qualities are also not desirable .
Maharashtra , Karnataka , Andhra Pradesh , Madhya Pradesh , Rajasthan and Gujarat are major sorghum growing states .
The above mentioned states contain around 88 percent of the total sorghum production of the country .
Thus it would be judicious and appropriate to call it the sorghum strip of the country .
In the sorghum section , in majority of the districts of Tamil Nadu and Karnataka red colored sandy land is found .
Thus the pH of such lands is acidic -LRB- 4.5-6-5 -RRB- .
In some parts the pH is also alkaline .
The water retention capacity of such land is generally of medium to low category .
The level of nitrogen in the land is low .
The soil of few districts of Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh , is usually of medium fertility , deep and black .
The creation of the particles of the soil generally worsens because of the dissolved salts .
Therefore there are difficulties in agricultural activities because the irrigation facilities are generally not available .
Generally in all such soils the level of nitrogen and phosphorus is less .
By the way sorghum is one of the major crops of this region but the use is less as a food grain .
It is the major crop of green and dry fodder of this region .
Its grain is fed to milk giving animals or hens .
Majority of the soil is sandy that is of gentle variety .
It is the major crop of Rajasthan , Maharashtra , Gujarat , Uttar Pradesh and Haryana .
87 percent of the total millet region of the country lies in these states only .
Rajasthan has its 45 percent region in other words Rajasthan is the biggest millet growing state .
Therefore it can be called the major paddy crop of Rajasthan .
It is also a major kharif crop of Gujrat and Haryana .
These three states have 80 percent of the total area thus it is the most significant millet strip of the country .
Gujarat , Rajasthan , Uttar Pradesh , Haryana , Maharashtra , Tamilnadu , Andhra Pradesh , Punjab and Madhya Pradesh are significant from the point of view of millet production .
Gujrat , Uttar Pradesh and Haryana produce 73 percent of the total production .
It is grown in sandy land .
Gentle and good drainage soil is considered ideal for this .
Because generally it can not bear sunken condition .
Water level at depth is considered an ideal condition .
The land in which it is grown is called desert rigosalic and liosalic .
The specialty of soils is that the size of the soil particles are big .
The pH is generally alkaline because of excess of stones -LRB- calcium carbonate -RRB- .
Thus the problem of erosion both due to water and air is severe .
Therefore it is essential to adopt soil water conservation methods along with erosion control .
The problem of sandy hills continuously changing place in Rajasthan and some regions is severe .
The size of soil particles in some millet growing areas of Punjab is so small that they are kept in the category of sirizem .
The soil has taken birth from granite , granet -LRB- ide -RRB- , quartzite and sand stone etc. stones .
Inshore sandy soil is found in Trinelvelli , Ramtirthpuram and southern Arkot districts of Tamilnadu .
In the millet region of Andhra Pradesh medium dark black colored soil is found .
It is grown in Karnataka , Tamilnadu , Andhra Pradesh , Maharshtra , Bihar , Odisha and Uttar Pradesh .
Therefore Madua is a crop of Karnataka .
The second position after Karnataka is of Tamil nadu the decreasing order of area is in Andhra Pradesh , Uttar Pradesh , Maharashtra , Bihar and Odisha .
The total area of other coarse grains apart from millet , sorghum and madua is approximately 48.1 lakh hectare .
Majority of its area is found in Madhya Pradesh , Tamil nadu , Uttar Pradesh , Andhra Pradesh , Gujarat , Bihar and Karnataka .
The soil of all these food grain producing areas is of very weak variety in terms of fertility .
They contain lesser quantities of nitrogen , phosphorus and biological elements .
In some parts the land is also uneven .
Generally the water absorbing capacity of all kinds of soil is low .
The roots of sorghum extends widely from the plants .
Their common depth is 3 to 4 feet .
The roots spread quite well in the land .
The stem is generally solid .
It is of multiple varieties and sweet and juicy also .
Its thickness is between 5-6 to 30 mm and the stems of some varieties can also be more thick than this .
The junction of the root is near the joint of the stem above the union of leaves where mature -LRB- elder primaridia -RRB- is found .
Roots arise from the lowest joints and in some varieties the roots generally arise from the joints above the ground .
The main purpose of these roots is to give support to the plants .
The leaves of sorghum are broad and smooth .
Its sheath and blade are two major parts .
The point where these parts join is known as collar whose major parts are ligbool and dewlap -LRB- Bal and Rast ,1970 -RRB- .
The leaves are generally hanging downwards and horizontally spread but in some varieties semi erected leaves also arise .
The middle line generally separates the sorghum leaf into two halves but this separation in some species is easy also .
The flower bunch of sorghum can be both loose and tied .
The loose variety is considered to be good from the point of view of production .
Sorghum is the cereal of paddy family -LRB- gramini -RRB-
It is called by many names .
It is the major crop of the dry regions of the country .
But there is no consensus and doubt free opinion about its outbreak .
Though it is considered to be the special crop in India but the botanists believe that sorghum was brought to India from South Africa .
It is also surprising that in the eastern coastal regions of Africa it is prevalent with the Hindi name `` Bajra `` .
Also it is extremely important that all the wild species and varieties of sorghum are available here .
Finally it seems to be possible that the amplification center of this crop is Africa .
Sorghum is an annual and multi annual variety of crop .
Sorghum is a straight growing plant .
Its height is 3-9 feet .
Lower height varieties are called Carbona sorghum .
Tillering is its specialty .
The number of tillers are found to be 5-20 .
The number of tillers in the northern regions of the country among summer crops is quite more .
The roots of sorghum is fibrous and it has only one primary root .
The first pair of ancillary roots arises from the first joint .
The development of the roots depends a lot more on the fertility of the soil , quantity of moisture in the soil and the quantity of manures .
The roots of sorghum grow in large quantities -LRB- weight and volume -RRB- , and they contain silica and may be that is why they are more resistant to bear dryness as compared to other crops .
Its corn is like spikes , 13-35 c.m and approximately 2-3 cms wide .
There are silky soft fibers below the corns .
The central part of the corn of sorghum is wide .
The flowering and anthesis activity begins from the upper portion of the corns ` middle part and heads towards the upper and lower region .
In this activity first the full flowers open then comes the turn of partial flowers .
Xenogamy is considered to be common for sorghum .
Madua-It is a significant cereal whose farming is done in India and Africa .
Thus it grows in the southern part of Europe but it has no use except being a fodder .
Also it is a point to be noted that the Sanskrit name of Madua is Rajika and it has different names in different parts of the country .
The roots of Madua are fibrous and quite more in number .
The stems are straight or sometimes a little bent , solid and smooth .
Its height is 1-1 .5 met . The tillers in Madua are 8-10 or also more than this .
The flower rod of Madua grows on the upper portion of plant .
The pollens are temporary and their lifespan is of 10-15 mins .
The process of flowering is simultaneous in all the fibers of the flower rods .
The pollen sheath takes 45 minutes in flowering and drying .
Anthesis period is of just 5 minutes .
Mangoes are self pollinating but natural xenogamy also takes place rarely .
Cornice or cocoon - Its scientific name is Panicum Italicum L. -LRB- or Sateria Italica B -RRB- .
Since ancient times for quite a long time its farming was done in the regions with temperate climate .
It was considered cereals during that time .
But now its grains are fed to the hens .
Cornice is one of those five plants whose plantation was done every year by the emperor himself in order to obey the China Nagn .
The cornice has three primary -LRB- seminal -RRB- roots .
The number of fibrous root is the most .
They arise because of the joints made at the surface of the ground .
The roots of the plant are active throughout their life .
It is yet not known how it grows and spreads inside the ground .
The stem of cocoon is thin , yellow and straight .
The height depends upon its variety .
yet it is commonly 0.3-2 met high .
The inner joints of the upper portion are in the form of spike like corns and the last inner joint is the longest .
Actually corn or capitulum grow on top of this .
Joints and inner joints are purple colored .
The darkness of this color is changeable .
Corncobs are like flower rod spike in cornice .
The color of grains are brown , light yellow , light red , orange , green orange or green purple .
It is smooth and white colored .
The surface of the seed is flat and dark color centered .
There are many English names of Chaina such as broom corn millet , hog millet and hersy millet .
It is also called common millet in Europe .
It grows doubly in southern and middle Russia , middle east and northern India and Manchuria .
Except Chaina little millet is generally mistakenly considered to be Chaina .
The farming of mite is done on the less fertile grounds of South India and Madhya Pradesh .
It has the capacity to bear both dryness and being a water welter .
It is grown upto 7000 height in our country .
Apart from Chaina and mite various other varieties of Panicum are consumed .
Barnyard Millet : Its scientific name is Echinochloa crus-galli framentasi -LRB- Raucsob link -RRB- , it is called as Japanese barnyard millet , Japanese millet , billion dollar grass -LRB- in America -RRB- and as Saanwa in our country .
According to the opinion of Mundkar -LRB- 1933 -RRB- , Sanwa in India is grown as a thick paddy crop .
In Egypt it is grown in such lands where due to excess of salt no other cereals or crops can be grown .
Saanwa and water grass that is echinochloa crus-galli resemble so much that it is difficult to identify them .
Its one more near associate wild grass -LRB- echinochloa colonum -RRB- is found in our country .
The grain of sanwa is covered with shiny white color shield and the inner portion by flower shield .
Both these shields become strong in the last phase of theit lifespan .
The Samajwadi Party in Uttar Pradesh has strongly opposed the Central government against the strict standards of Food corporation of India for the purchase of paddy .
Rewati Raman Singh of Samajwadi Party has demanded for government intervention raising the matter in the zero hour in Lok Sabha .
The farmers are not getting the benefits of Minimum Support Price -LRB- MSP -RRB- .
It is apprehended that if the FCI does not makes the purchase then the middle persons taking its benefit will start purchasing paddy at unreasonable prices .
He said that the matter will be sort out not by the committee but by the food ministry .
The food ministry should direct the FCI to make the purchase at any cost .
Then only paddy will be purchased in the state .
Any ways this year the expenditure on paddy has increased because of the late in monsoon .
By the end of this year all the states will be associated with cash subsidy scheme .
It was said by the Central Finance Miniser P. Chidambaram in a press conference .
He said that even the finance minister has no clue on the subsidy schemes of the Central government that where are these subsidy amounts going .
It is known after 2-3 years through audit report that the subsidy amount has been misused .
Cash Subsidy scheme shall be introduced in such a situation .
According to a new world report every year more than two crore tonnes of wheat gets wasted due to lack of better storage facilities .
According to the world report of Institution of Mechanical Engineers -LRB- IME -RRB- on the wastage of food grains , humans are unable to use approximately half of the total food grains produced in the world .
According to the report approximately two crore ten lakhs tonne food grains gets wasted in India which is equal to the entire cereals produced in Australia .
Because of the lack of sufficient storage facilities quite a lot of food grains gets wasted due to rats and other animals .
Dairy farmers are in crisis because of high cost and the decreasing prices of milk .
The dairy industry is trying to minimize its loss because of the ban on the huge storage cream free milk powder and its export .
Consequently primary products are also being harmed .
Such situations are not only strange for India .
If we take the example of California , then in 2009 , from a total of 1800 dairy farms approximately 20 percent had to be shut because of high fodder cost and transportation expenses .
Similarly , in 2009 when the international milk prices had been constantly low , the European organization , challenging the world trade organization once again implemented the subsidy arrangement on milk manufacturers .
Under the same scheme the organization in order to compensate the loss gave a subsidy of 3600 crore rupees to its dairy farmers .
While America and European organizations have always tried to relieve the farmers from financial crisis , leaving the farmers at their condition due to the falling prices of dairy products is beyond understanding , because they are not even responsible for that .
Several dairy farms in Punjab , Gujarat , Maharashtra and Rajasthan have been closed .
There are 10 lakh dairy farmers in the European organization .
On a collective way they produce more milk as compared to India and America .
According to the standards of World Trade Organization , it was expected from the European organization that they will stop the subsidies given under Common Agriculture Policy -LRB- CAP -RRB- .
The European organization rehabilitated the subsidies in order to support the production and export of its milk products during financial crisis .
As a result it captures 32 percent part of the dairy products of the world market .
Because of the huge amount of subsidies due to the dis-balance of the market , dairy farmers are able to be protected and they are able to send subsidized milk to the developed countries at lower prices .
During 1999-2000 India had imported 1,30,000 tonne cream free milk powder at zero tariff .
As a result , tariff on milk was increased to 60 percent .
The European organization has once again shown its power by asking for 90 percent rebate in tariff on milk under proposed European organization - India free trade agreement .
The European organization is seeing India as its big market for its milk and milk products , and it is quite obvious that India will open its domestic dairy market for European organization imports .
The European organization after March , 2009 has started purchasing profuse butter and milk at the rate of 2,218 and 1,698 euro per tonne consequently .
Under the Milk price support program in america it has been decided that the government will buy profuse cheese , butter and fat free milk products at a minimum price .
Why is this that our government can not provide such subsidies to support its dairy farmers during fall in prices ?
For this the state governments shall first think about giving subsidies to the cooperative organizations to reduce the government purchasing price of milk to at least 25 rupees per liter .
Apart from this the interest rate on the bank debts for these farmers shall also be reduced .
One of the senior officers of the government said that it has been proposed to increase the levy price of sugar to more than 2 rupees per kg in comparison to the last year .
The finance ministry is thinking on this proposal .
With the increase in levy prices , the burden of extra 400-500 crore rupee subsidy shall increase .
Sugar industry is totally under government ` s control .
The assessment of levy prices is done on the basis of fair and profitable prices -LRB- FRP -RRB- .
For the commercial year 2012-13 the FRP was 170 rupees per quintal .
The government purchases sugar from the mills at low costs and sells them at the rate of 13.50 rupees per kg at the ration shops .
From the point of view of earning and employment , the Fish industry in India is quite strong .
Our country is one of the leading producers in the category of fish production at the world level .
The industry also gives one percent contribution in GDP .
Being in a strong situation this industry is employing 14.5 million people of the country .
Not only this it is expected that by 2016 the domestic consumption of all kinds of fishes will increase from 7.5 metric tonne to 10 metric tonne .
It is also assumed that the export of fish production of India will increase and by 2014 8-10 percent of the total produce will exported .
The overall data of these progress indicate that there is immense opportunities for the youth who are eager to make their career in this sector .
Fisheries science is a multidimensional science under which the birth of different species of fish , their behavior , their life and the study of their biological aspects is done .
Under this the cultivation and rearing of any of the important fish and aquatic animals of fresh water , brackish water and marine environment are included .
The motive of this science is to develop and care sea animals .
The work of a fishery scientist is to study fish and monitor the efforts of conserving their natural habitat , i.e. natural global convention places .
It is also the responsibility of fishery science to study for preparing the medicines made from fish for removing the diseases of man .
While the scientists related to the study of applied research study the problems related to the habitat of fish .
Experience and higher education in this area guarantees more salary .
Many opportunities in both government and private sectors are present for the fisheries science graduates .
Not only this a graduate can also work as a farm manager , hatchery manager , fisheries inspector in a aquaculture farm , hatchery , processing plant etc. .
Fisheries sciences have courses in both Undergraduate and postgraduate level .
The students completing their 10 +2 with biological science can take admission in the four year bachelor of fisheries science i.e BFSc . by qualifying the entrance examination .
Apart from undergraduate and postgraduate courses also professional training courses are available in fisheries and allied disciplines where admission could be taken .
Whatever is being said in the governmental claims are being sealed this year .
Now , the naive farmers are growing potato-cabbage brinjal , peppers , radish Jack fruit , banana , guavas to papaya .
Now they have also learned to make earnings from tuberose and marigold .
Apart from the farming of Paspalum scrobiculatum-mite , green gram , black gram and paddy interests towards the farming rabi crops of peas , gram , bob seeds has grown .
Advanced techniques and better training are needed for results and profits .
160 farmers with the help of national gardening mission have planted cashew nuts in 300 hectares .
300 farmers are taking interest in the production of bananas .
More than 1500 farmers are engaged in the production of potatoes .
Fruits and vegetables trade has got a boost due to the increased irrigation facilities .
According to the executive engineer Thakur of the water resource department the Panchayat had demanded to make stop dams and crossovers in 2011 .
More than 50 acres of fields are being irrigated through stop dam .
Swamy Manish Maharaj of Ramkrishna Mission emphasized on Cow rearing .
Agriculture expansion officer MD Bas , head of the village Narayan Markam , the deputy director of agricultural department Bijnoriya and the deputy director of animal department Dr. R.K Kurre asked to avail benefits by giving detailed plans of the government .
Dr. Praveen Khare told about the measures to prevent the cattle from diseases .
Those who have strong determination , achieve their goal , people succeed not because they have facilities but because they have confidence .
The views and work style of a youth farmer Satyanarayan Cherwa of village Panchayat Udlakchaar , 35 kms away from the district headquarters Baikunthpur is changing both the fete and picture of the farmers .
The hard work and goal of Udlakchaar ` s farmer Satyanarayan Cherwa is a model for all the farmers of the district which they also want to implement on themselves .
In the changing materialistic milieu while the young generation is migrating towards cities leaving away agriculture and farming there are also some people who have the passion to do something .
For this he neither needs a big amount nor anybody ` s support .
Gram Panchayat Udlakchhar ` s reident Satyanarayan Cherwa is one such youth who has the confidence of changing his fete on hard work and labor .
After studying in the village ` s school till class 8th he decided that he will help his father in farming .
Its better result was visible in their fields in the first experiment only .
The greenery of the fields increased their confidence and they also got several times more crops than before .
After listening to their suggestions when they used organic and earthworm manure the entire village became green .
While all the farmers became happy with its use it was started being discussed in the entire village .
In order to benefit the farmers and promote organic manure they began this initiative in villages .
Also self prepared manure was freely distributed by making groups of 100 farmers of the entire district .
The production in the field was such which the farmers never saw .
The Chief Minister in Delhi has implemented a scheme with the name `` Annashri `` to deposit Rs . 600 in the accounts of poor people every month .
While the Prime Minister has already said that food and manure subsidy will not be given directly in the form of money .
Rajasthan government has also started a plan to deposit scholarships , pension and MANREGA wages in the accounts of needy .
According to Congress , directly depositing money in the bank accounts of the poor , will stop financial faults and reduce subsidies besides being an electoral advantage .
But still the planners should give a introduction of their decency .
