In India production of Apricot is being done in abundance in north-eastern states Arunachal Pradesh , Mizoram , Nagaland , and high mountainous regions of Meghalya apart from Jammu and Kashmir , Uttranchal , Himachal Pradesh .
Currently special attention is being paid to its improved cultivation by horticulturists along with scientists , because more and meritorious production given by its ageti speci .
Among temperate fruit trees Apricot -LRB- prunus armeniaca -RRB- is main endocarped fruit of Rosaceae family .
Fruits of apricot along with being tasty , yellow and attractive in looks also stay stable for a few days .
Along with using its fresh fruits in the form of fruits many products can be prepared by conserving pulp of more ripened fruits .
Conserved fruit products can be sent to far flung markets and amount of kernel , moti and protein remains in excess in fruits of varieties of almond like kernel .
For apricot cold temperature is only the best but during crop maturation it is necessary for warmth in the crop .
Among mountainous fruits apricot matures fastest .
Such places where temperature is 16.6-32 .20 C on an average , are appropriate for growth of fruits and quality .
Loamy with water erosion power and light loamy soil is especially appropriate for apricot production .
Clay and heavy soil is harmful for its cultivation .
Light gravels and , in which there is enough moisture along with organic elements , its cultivation can be done successfully .
From economic perspective to extract more production out of apricot it is beneficial to plant trees of excellent quality .
Currently description of some early maturing hybrid species is as follows , whose expansion and publicity work is being done by Horticulture Research and Extension Centre , Chaubatia .
Chaubatiya honey : this species is prepared through hybrid of turkey and seeds .
Its fruits get ready on ripening from the first week of June to second week .
Seed plants obtained from seeds of apricot , plum and wild apric .
On the basis of research experiments done in Horticulture Research and Extension Centre , Chaubatia ` T Budding ` is more prevalent for apricot prolongation .
Along with an experienced gardener minimum materials are also required - budding knife , 200 yard alkathene , fevicol .
Appropriate atmosphere , time and budding procedure prove success .
Generally if during budding there is 65 to 85 percent moisture in atmosphere then more success is achieved .
During winters when plants stay in state of hibernation is the right time to plant .
Plants can be planted from the end of December to the beginning of February .
The field should be irrigated immediately after sowing .
In mountainous regions plants should be sown on terraces .
North-east slope is the most suitable for plant sowing .
The spread of its trees is relatively more as compared to peach .
Plants should be sown only when soil settles down properly .
Make sure that while sowing that the grafted part of the plant stays 10-15 cm above land surface .
Organic fertilisers which take time in decomposition , rotting and to come in available state in soil .
In fertilisers phosphorus and potash filled fertiliser dissolve late .
And reach the roots in the form of solvent .
This is why it is beneficial to use them deep near roots .
The organic manures should be used by putting them within the boundary of the fruit tree at a distance of 30 -40 c.m from the main branch during November and December .
Half amount of nitrogen fertiliser should be given during spring season before flowering and the remaining half amount in the second week of April .
Gardens in which weeding is done properly , and less number of fruits fall before ripening .
Regular irrigation of new transplanted plants at weekly interval of may-June should be done along with this mulching with dry leaves at the base of plant is also beneficial .
There is special importance of pruning in temperate trees .
Shape of trees without pruning is not proper and harvest is also not good .
The task of pruning can be successfully done from November to January .
Flowers come on apricot in February .
And May onward ripe fruits are begin to be received .
In the species which ripe late fruits are received till late .
Second weeding should be done when the stone in fruit begins to harden and fruit then begins its growth .
For the protection of fruits and to save them from getting scratched one should pluck them by picking through hands .
Such fruits which are growing should not be plucked .
While plucking fruits should be kept in crates .
Scars appear on fruits when rubbed against each other , which rot even before reaching the far-flung markets .
Apricots fruits can not be kept for many days after being plucked .
Its fruit products can be sent to far flung markets .
Kernels extracted out of seeds of its good varieties are tasty and contain protein .
Useful cream , soap etc can be made with its seeds and oil from kernels received from wild apricot seeds .
Apricot fruits are sent to nearby markets for sale .
Silver leaf disease : This disease haapens due to Stereum purpureum .
Pathogenic fungus resides in the tree root in the beginning , due to which a special kind of poison reaches in the tree , due to which leaves of disease-effected branches begin to shine like white silver .
Gradually leaves begin to shed from diseased branches and branches dry up .
If this disease is not cured in time then trees dry up within 1 - 2 years .
The disease of drying up from the head : This is the most dreadful disease of apricot .
Due to the fury of this disease twig begins to dry up from the upper tip and as the fury of this disease keeps on increasing half part of the plant dries up .
In the extreme stage of the disease tiny boils erupt inside the skin of twigs .
These boils begin to blast after converting to black-brown powder form in the extremes stage of disease .
Sunstroke disease : Due to the fury of this disease the barks of thick branches apart from main trunk begin to crack .
From the wood below the bark long cracks appear .
This disease occurs due to more cold in winters and more temperature in summers .
Usually more harm takes place at on the southern parts of the trunk due to this disease .
Not just decoration lotus is in fact a useful flower from the perspective of income .
Important thing is this that since antiquity it has received a respected place in India and even today it is known as national flower .
Lotus bouquet spreading its radiance from mud to clean pond has an important place in decoration and because of good vessel life it has an important place in excised flowers .
In landscaping it is grown in artificial ponds .
Its dry seeded beans and flowers are used for decoration .
Lotus flowers are also used for complete meals and treatment of diseases .
Cultivation of national flower of India , lotus can be done easily in slow flowing or stagnant water , places with tropical or sub-tropical climate up to height of 1800 meter .
Its stem is long , flat and contains pores .
In India lotus flowers are used for praying .
Its roots , vegetables , pickle and papad and boiled form are used in the form of eatables .
In the field of medicine roots and leaves of lotus are used for the treatment of fever and diarrhea due to heat stroke from sun rays .
Alkaloid found in its legumes helps in stopping blood flow .
According to medical reports its nectar and stamen are also used for medicines .
The embryo of seed is used for the treatment of mental diseases and unconsciousness .
Petals are used for the treatment of syphilis .
If right care is taken for beautiful flower lotus the abundant produce can be taken .
It is a plant which flourishes in tropical climate and in deep waters .
For the growth of this flower there is requirement of 200-300 Celsius temperature and abundant sunlight .
Water temperature should not be less than 180 Celsius during growth .
In more cold this plant goes into dormancy and it gets destroyed due to extreme cold temperatures .
As far as the question o f soil goes cultivation of lotus takes place pretty well in clayey to loamy soil .
For flower ` s good quality harvest organic substance should be mixed in soil in enough amount .
Amboleen : This is a medium-sized plant in which white , pink -LRB- twin colored -RRB- flowers bloom .
These flowers wilt in 4 - 5 days .
In this variety flowering takes place from July to September and flowers bloom in excessive numbers .
In this type , production of rhizomes is also more .
From the last week of June from the second or third node of rhizome flower-stalk begins to come out .
Its attractive flowers and leaves look very beautiful in ponds or in vessels .
Alexander the great : In this variety the color of flowers is dark pink and red .
Flowers are of a large size .
Production of flowers take place from June to August .
Production of rhizomes is more and its production also increases with appropriate amount of fertilisers .
Bonnie Clyde : Flowering in this variety takes place for a very long time -LRB- May to September -RRB- flowers should be plucked after wilting .
Its flowers are of dark pink color , which turn to light pink color during wilting .
For lotus harvest various ways of enhancement are used .
You can adopt them as per your own convenience .
From the seed : A lot of time is taken for plant to come out of seed .
Even after storing seeds for 8 years there is no effect on their germination .
An estimate has been made that lotus leaves germinate even after around 200 years .
Transplantation through dissection of rhizomes instead of seed flowers develop in less time .
While transplanting through rhizomes one should keep in mind that there should be 2 - 3 buds in every rhizome ` s disintegrated part .
Transplantation of lotus should be done in March - April .
Because this is a crop of summers , therefore maximum flower production takes lace in monsoon .
According to the land ponds of various shapes and sizes are chosen for lotus flower production .
Nowadays artificially made polythene , fiber glass or concrete ponds are used .
The floor and walls of pond should we water-proof and the thickness of wall should be 15 cm .
The depth of the pond should be at least 1 meter and there should be appropriate system of water drainage to change water .
For this a pipe should be joined for water ` s entry and exit .
In the situation of less water the transplantation of plants of pond should be done directly in soil .
During winters less water gets warm quickly and it is very helpful in plant production .
If enough sunlight is received in the pond then due to water being warm leaves come out early .
With this flowering takes place quickly .
By repeating this activity there is production of good quality flowers .
If enhancement in pond is to be done through seed then first pot should be prepared .
Seed should be sown in pot at a depth of 5 cm .
When 5-6 sprout out then they should be carefully transplanted in the pond .
To maintain the beauty of the pond appropriate care of plants is necessary .
For prevention form mosquitoes colorful fishes should be put in a pond .
With it the grace of pond increases .
Rotten plants should be rooted out time to time and be changed with healthy plants .
One should put snails in the pond because they provide cleanliness to the pond by eating dirt of pond .
By doing this micro organisms can be controlled .
Transplantation of lotus flowers is also done in pots or vessels .
The root of lotus flowers spread in width , therefore their transplant should be done in round and wide pot .
There is more possibility of roots getting destroyed in square pots .
The bonsai varieties of lotus can be grown in small pots .
There should be sufficient amount of compost manure mixed in soil .
With this there is an increase in quality and produce of flowers .
By plucking leaves from time to time there is an increase in the quality and of rhizomes .
For good growth and flower harvest one should keep plucking after their decolouration .
At various levels insect ailments effect lotus .
Waterlily Aphid -LRB- Rhopalosiphum Nymphaeae -RRB- and Cotton Aphid -LRB- Aphis Gossypii -RRB- infect lotus .
Due to attack of these aphids leaves are destroyed after being distorted and the color of flowers fade away .
Metasystox or melathiyon -LRB- 0.2 percent -RRB- should be sprayed on plants for the control of Aephid .
Beetle named Popillia japonica in July and August harm a lot by eating leaves and flowers .
They pluck completely mature flower buds 2-3 days before flowers blossom .
The vessel age flowers plucked at this stage is more .
Lotus flower begins to dry as soon as winters begin , therefore at the end of October ploughing of rhizomes should begin .
After the peaks of seeds turn brown they should also be extracted out .
Mushroom is a nutritious , healthy and disease eliminating easily digestible edible substance full of medicinal qualities .
This full of nutritional qualities is an important alternative for vegetarian population and from the perspective of nutrition holds a middle spot between vegetarian non-vegetarian food .
In mushroom around 22-35 percent high quality protein is found .
Mushroom provides all amino acid necessary for the body .
In it cholesterol , fat and sodium salt are not found , due to which it is an ideal food for obesity , kidney and heart attack patients .
Button mushroom is the most grown edible mushroom and because of availability of medicinal qualities it has medicinal importance as well .
They contain lectin , anti cancerous krestine & anti micro-oraganism herecium acid , phenolic and quinone to stop blood clotting which prevent heart diseases .
Mushroom is a kind of fungus which is known by different names by people of different countries and different places such as flower of earth , khumbi , kshtrak , bhumi , kavak , kathphula , puff-walls , kusumpa , food of fairies .
The aborigines of India have been using mushroom as food since ancient times and they have been mentioned in ancient texts and the Rigveda .
In most plain regions of India commercial production of button mushroom is done .
It is popular , with pleasing taste and fragrance and in its shape it appears like a button .
Its two species Agaricus bisporus and Agaricus bitorquis are grown commercially .
In the country ` s total mushroom production 85 percent button mushroom is produced and in global production it is at first place with shareholding of 32 percent .
It is a mushroom to be grown at a low temperature 15-20 C and 80-85 percent moisture .
Cold climate , appropriate temperature and moisture is required for its farming .
This is generally grown inside rooms under controlled temperature and environment .
This can be grown throughout the year in hilly areas but in Northern India during winters -LRB- October to March -RRB- its farming can be done easily .
For farming of button mushroom there is need of specially made fertiliser , which is known as compost and the process of making fertiliser is called composting .
Therefore the purpose of making appropriate food ingredients available is implicated behind the making of compost .
In compost primarily apart form wheat chaff chemical fertilisers are mixed .
Long duration method : For making manure with this method requirement of big machines is not there and expense is also less .
It takes 28 days to make compost with this method and 8 turnings are done in this method .
For compost manufacturing pukka floor which is covered with a roof should be used .
Prior to manure manufacturing floor should be made bacteria free by washing with 2 percent formalin .
Seventh paltai : during the time of this paltai compost manure comes int a situation of almost being ready .
On the 25th day test -LRB- by smelling -RRB- of compost gas is done for the presence of ammonia gas .
After the eighth paltai the heap is spread on the floor to cool down by breaking it .
The compost chosen should be free from ammonia odor and should be dark brown and green in color with appropriate moisture .
P-H mean of manure should be a little alkaline 7.1-7 .2 , moisture 65-70 percent and amount of nitrogen 2.2-2 .4 percent .
Water drops should not fall on pressing compost by taking it in fist for the purpose of recognition of the right amount of water .
Excessive water and ammonia both are harmful for mushroom spawn .
Spawn becomes inactive even before its development .
Therefore special attention should be given to amount of water and presence of ammonia .
Short duration method : This method of compost manufacture is best for commercial production of mushroom .
During this method the compost substances are decomposed by decaying them in less time and controlled environment .
In this way in less time more amount of compost is received , with which increase in income can be done by selling it to small mushroom producers .
This method is most appropriate for the farming of button mushroom .
In compost made with this method the outbreak of microbes , diseases and insects is less .
Compost should be kept on temperature of 40-450 C for 24-48 hours .
Blower should be given more time on there being a difference of 1-30 C in air and temperature of compost inside the chamber .
The temperature of air and temperature of compost both should be same .
Seeds used in mushroom production are called spawn .
For a successful mushroom business there is a requirement of appropriate strain , pure culture and quality spawn giving more harvest .
Spawn should look white , fine , silky and shiny .
Should be considered old on it being brown and dirty , with which less produce is obtained , therefore spawn older more than one month should not brought into use .
Spawn should be made on the grains of wheat or jowar because spawn made on their grains is considered good in comparison to others .
After the decomposition , spawn is sown in well prepared composts .
The manner of mixing spawn in compost is known as spawning .
In per quintal ready compost 500-750 gram -LRB- at t he rate of 0.50-7 .5 percent -RRB- spawn is required .
On using excessive amount of spawn mycelium spreads fast and more harvest of mushroom is also received , but profit is not gained in the ratio of price and expense addition of spawn .
The sown composts should be filled in shelf or wooden boxes -LRB- 1.0 x0 .5 x0 .20 m -RRB- or in polythene bags -LRB- 0.70 x0 .50 m -RRB- by pressing them gently .
Spawned compost bed is covered by a inrjivikrit newspaper .
If polythene bag is being used then close the bag after closing it from upside .
If casing of compost is not done then mushrooms do not sprout in large amount .
It saves compost from drying and helps in the exchange of gases .
Any kind of big grains , lumps , stones should not be there in covering soil and should be free from insects and diseases .
Its water absorption power should be 60 percent and making should be porous , so that execution of gases during the making of mushrooms can be done easily .
Before bringing covering layer in use it is important to do nirjivikaran .
Due to this harmful insects nematodes and microbes etc are destroyed .
The soil cover is decomposed on 650 C. for 6-8 hours through hot vapor .
It is good and appropriate to use this process prior to 24 hours of layering soil .
The decomposition is carried through chemicals when there unavailability of hot vapor .
Generally : Cleansing of cover soil is done through formalin .
It is important for the ready covering soil to be free of formalin smell .
Therefore it should be prepared two weeks before laying it .
After Mycelium of mushroom has spread well four cm thick layer of covering soil is laid over compost .
For the purpose of keeping covering soil damp light sprinkling of water should be done once o r twice in a day .
Hard layer should not set , which does not let mycelium to develop completly .
10-12 days after covering soil has been laid production of pin head begins .
At the time of pin head coming out temperature should be 15-180 C and dampness 85 percent .
To let oxygen enter and for carbon dioxide to exit windows should be opened in morning and evening .
2-3 plucking can be done through spawning of one time .
Generally the selection of mushroom should be done gently and carefully in morning before spraying water .
Soiled part of solid trunk is separated by cutting through knife .
The main reason for failure of mushroom production units in the country is the effect of harmful diseases and insects .
For disease control principle of prevention than treatment should be adopted .
Cobweb : It is of brown white color in the beginning and later turns to red color .
Diseased mushrooms look like cotton balls but the inner part rots on decaying .
Polluted covering soil and excessive dampness are helpful in spreading this disease .
This disease spreads with more intensity because of pieces left behind carelessly while plucking mushrooms .
Dry bubble : The factor of this disease is fungus named verticillium fungicola .
Diseased mushrooms become crooked and irregular .
Temperature , moisture , late plucking of diseased mushroom and lack of cleanliness are helpful in the spread of this disease .
Wet bubble : This disease happens due to Mycogyne perniciosa named truffle .
Diseased mushroom look like small or big deformed cauliflowers in size .
The color of infected area becomes yellow-brown .
At times brown colored truffle are visible in patch over spawned compost or cover soil .
On the layered spot mycelium of mushroom does not grow and harvest is also low .
If the infection pink colored fungus takes place once , then usually it is passed on till many crops .
Inky cap : They grow on button mushrooms in the form of weeds and are their natural competitors .
Inky cap fungus grow due to compost not being made properly and quantity of ammonia gas being left behind at the time of spawning .
Bacteria mummy : This diseases characterizes bacteria infection in the crop .
A few days after laying covering soil pin heads increase pieces everywhere .
Virus produce diseases at mushroom crop as well .
The viral diseases are found with these names : button mushroom brown disease , aquatic stem , X or die back disease .
Due to this disease an entire crop is completely destroyed .
Generally in mushroom La-Frans and X disease spreads due to infection of mushroom virus 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 and 5 .
Mycelium of mushroom is unable to grow in covering soil or dies out after some growth .
Instead of erupting from bed in a regular fashion they sprout sporadically from various places in the form of bunches .
Maximum mushrooms with long stalks and small caps sprout which are called drum sticks .
Production and development of pin head happens gradually .
The stalks of mushroom are aquatic , brown , loosely joined from the substrate and separate easily with gentle touch .
Insects hold primary position among the factors causing deterioration in mushroom production .
They are primarily affected by flies , mites , spring tales , beetle , nematodes which cause economic damage by reducing the production of mushroom varieties .
There is much importance of crop management in mushroom production .
The composting shade and harvesting room should have concrete floor .
Before bringing cabins into use clean them by whitewashing them using lime .
Blower can be switched on on reduction in temperature .
Use pure and disease free spawn .
Destroy diseased mushroom and pin head after taking them out .
The labors engaged in sowing should clean their hands and wear rubber gloves before sowing .
The compost and soil cover should be built on clean and concrete floor and the pasteurization should be carried in an appropriate manner -LRB- for 4 hours at 600 C . temperature .
Maintain 65-70 percent moisture and PH mean between 7.2-7 .5 .
The selection should be made carefully , the left out mushroom pieces should be cut and separated with knife .
After harvesting crop compost and cover soil should be burried by a thick layer of soil after throwing them in pits .
On sighting inky cap or truffle fungus one should uproot them and bury in a pit .
Workers or visitors should not be allowed to go inside the farm without washing their hands .
A minimum difference of 48 hours should be kept between mushroom plucking and sprinkling .
Production of only one species of mushroom should not be done .
Various species should be included in seasonal crop circle .
Due to this the outbreak of insects and diseases is less and along with this year long production work can be carried on .
After completion of crop duration used compost and mushroom remains should be filled in craters constructed quite far away from production cabins .
It can be used in the form of organic fertiliser for production of other crops .
Button and dhingri mushrooms are grown primarily in the country .
In them 85 percent production takes place of button mushroom only .
Mushroom farming is appropriate from the perspective of environment and is done for nutritional and medicinal gains .
Its main benefit is in human health , its use in coming ages could be done in abundance in the form of healthy meal .
Production of all vegetables take place in Himachal Pradesh .
In accordance to weather here production of various kinds of vegetables is done .
Many vegetables are grown during monsoon as well of which tomato and brinjal are main .
In both these vegetables a lot of harm is done by insects of various kinds .
The borer moth insect of tomato : The trunk of this insect harm the flower and fruit of tomatoes .
The fury of this insect is more in April - June .
Adult moth are of medium size of yellowish brown and gray color .
The trunks are green and brown in color , which harm the fruits by keeping half their body outside fruit and because of this the fruits do not remain in a condition to be sent in market .
The affected fruits should be destroyed by plucking their trunks .
Fruit fly : The wrath of this fly is more in fruits like cucumber , bottle gourd , tomato , bitter gourd and guava .
Adult female fly lay eggs by boring in the fruits through needle like part of the posterior part of her stomach .
The fury of this insect stays till October after beginning in June - July .
Collect effected fruits and throw them in deep pit and cover with soil .
Use trap to attract male fly .
White fly : Offspring of this insect are like a thin film which stay clung to the lower surface of leaves .
adult insects are of the size of a small fly , which stay on the lower surface of leaves .
Offspring and adults both suck juice form the leaves , due to which leaves turn yellow and dry up .
The growth of plants stop due to outbreak of this disease and decrease in produce arises .
This insects also spread viral diseases , due to which a lot of harm is done to the crop .
Do not make use of any insecticide more than twice continuously .
Red mite : Its outbreak is more in warm and dry climate .
On the back side of red mite usually there are 2 deep colored spots .
These spots are of the food elements inside their body which are visible on the outside .
The babies as well the mature mites suck various parts of plant and because of this the green part of the plant is destroyed .
I the beginning light white-yellow colored small patches like an edge of a needle appear on the leaves .
The mite makes silk web on plants when the fury increases and all the phases of eggs and mites are found in that web .
These web put bad impact on the process of photosynthesis .
The infected plants become weak and it hampers the productivity .
The fruits appear to be small and their quality reduces .
Tobacco insect : The adult insects are brown colored flies with black and white soft stripes .
These insects also destroy the fruits when the plants start bearing fruits .
The insects should be collected and destroyed in their initial stage itself .
The big insects are generally not affected by insecticides .
The insect can be prevented if spodo kill prepared from organic insecticide N . P . V . is sprayed in prescribed amount .
Tala insect : This insect is light green or light blackish brown in color and remains stuck on leaves , branches and flowers like a lice .
Leaves curl on excessive outbreak of insects and development of plants stop .
Tela insect also spreads viral diseases among plants .
Leaf miner insect : This insect primarily harms crops such as tomatoes , cucumber etc .
Female insect is of blackish brown color , which lays eggs inside leaves .
The babies or maggot coming out of the eggs make squiggly mines between the upper and lower surface and destroy the green substance .
The maggots remain inside the mines and it affects the photosynthesis process of plants .
The plants become dry and fall before time .
The growth of the plant retards & the number of flowers decrease and the productivity decreases .
The infected plants which carry mines should be destroyed from time to time .
The stem and fruit borer moth : The trunk of this insect is light pink in color and their head is yellow in color with 20 m.l length .
The fury of this insect is visible only during the last stage when the insects makes bores in order to come out of the fruits .
The affected fruits and stems should be destroyed .
The eggplant wasp : This insect is semicircular , coppery or orange in color and the wings have around 14 black colored dots .
The baby insects are yellow in color with spines on their body .
Apart from aubergine this insect harms tomato , potato and bitter gourd a lot .
Jassid : the vegetable producers can save their crops by making right use of approved pesticides for harmful insects and can get more production .
Farmers should keep in mind that no pesticide should not be used continuously twice .
The intensity of cold in the plains of northern India increases from the beginning of November and it reaches its peak by the arrival of December .
Nights are very cold and to the extent that average temperature comes near about 15-200 Celsius .
Temperate fruit tree go to hibernation in this season but one needs to take special care to save tropical and subtropical fruits such as banana , papaya , litchi , mango and jack fruit etc . from cold .
Selling orange , kinno , sweetlime , malta , guava and strawberry in markert after plucking : These two months are important considering pruning of grapes , pear , apricot etc . and to give them fertilisers and manure .
Mango : Do deep tilling in feilds so that eggs and pupa of mij insects , fruit fly and gujiya insects are destroyed by winters and birds .
If insects have already climbed up trees then do bhurkav of 0.2 percent carboryl powder .
For the control of phoma blight sprinkle copper oxychloride -LRB- 3 gram -RRB- .
Irrigate newly planted trees , but do not irrigate mature -LRB- fruiting -RRB- trees otherwise blossoms begin to come before time , which is destroyed due to excessive cold .
To save plants in nursery from dew one should cover them with shed .
Guava : Save ready fruits from bats and birds and make them reach the market in time by plucking them with the help of a pole .
Give a light irrigation in November so that the shape and quality of fruit remains good .
The mother plants from whom new plants are to be prepared through stooling method should be cut up to 10-15 cm . above the surface of ground so that new plants can be prepared from them in February .
Papaya : From the perspective of tolerance towards winters papaya is an extremely tender fruit .
Not just newly transplanted but mature plants also need to be saved During November-December in north India .
Keep giving light irrigation to adult plants and cover new plants with the help of straw or polythene and maintain appropriate level of moisture .
Berry : Keep the garden weed free for prevention from fruit-fly .
There is a possibility of infliction of powdery mildew disease .
Spray karethen -LRB- 1 ml per liter -RRB- or sulphur powder -LRB- 0.2 percent -RRB- for its control .
During November-December the outbreak of fruit fly in berries is more .
Shedding of fruits is also a problem in berries , for the control of which spray of 2.4-D -LRB- 1.5 gram -RRB- should be done in the first week of November .
Amla : Give manure fertiliser in amla garden .
On the problem of fruit shedding due to tissue damage spray borax -LRB- 0.6 percent -RRB- .
Because of the problem of fruit rotting in December a solution of 3 gm water blytox should be sprayed .
Jackfruit : Use cow dung manure and phosphorus rich fertilisers in November in adult trees .
Citrus fruits : During December there is fury of infection -LRB- Gondarti -RRB- in citrus fruits .
For its management take out the bark of the effected area of its trunk by scratching .
Then after a paste of Bordon -LRB- 1:2:20 -RRB- or ridomil gold -LRB- 4gm -RRB- should be applied on the scratchy part and the healthy part surrounding it .
The French Honey sucker coming out in new orchards should be cut and separated by scissor .
Apple : In November do weeding of gardens .
To sow new gardens in December fill the pits with soil and manure till first week .
In lowly mountainous regions where there is not much cold , its sowing can be done by the end of this month in winters .
For good crop it is necessary to have a mixture of 2-3 types .
In regions with excess cold prune plants this very month .
After this apply chaubatiya paste on the cut part .
For the management of san jose scale insect finish spray of agro spray oil int he first week of December .
Grapes : Grape goes in hibernation after shedding leaves in December .
During this time to prepare new plant of grape plant cutting .
Sow new gardens with one year old prepared plants .
Strawberry : By November strawberry catch up with growth completely and at this time one should apply mulch of black polythene .
In the situation of fog and mist cover the field during day as well .
Cover plants at night only during clear weather .
Onion : Finish the onion sowing task by the last fortnight of 15 November to December .
For sowing use pots of healthy and appropriate age -LRB- 60 days -RRB- .
By sowing pots of less or more age the shape of knots does not become proper .
The sowing should be done on raised ridges , doing this prevents water and it is convenient for weed control .
Peas : Early varieties that are sown in October start yielding fruits in December .
The early crops are destroyed much by birds .
To save form birds tie a shiny lace -LRB- light reflector -RRB- on all four sides of the field .
Leafy vegetables : Growth of spinach , corriander , amarnathus and fenugreek becomes worth harvesting by November .
Delay or hurry in the first harvest adversely affects the entire produce .
Finish harvesting before 10 in the morning or during evening .
After harvesting of leafy vegetables do not wash them at all otherwise rotting begins between bundles .
In November mulching in potato crop and its sowing are main activities .
The is fear of blight disease in potatoes during December , specially when there are clouds and light shower .
After 15th December there is fear of extreme cold and potatoes and aubergine can be affected from extreme cold .
Among all of them aubergine is affected very soon due to chilling winters .
Cabbage class vegetables : Harvest the early crops of cauliflower , cabbage and broccoli and send them to market .
Due to the delay in harvesting broccoli and cauliflower catches anthodium while the market pays more price for good and tight fruits .
Gladiolus : apply clay on gladiolus plants during November . If it is not done the plants fall down in December due to the pressure on flower stalk .
Give second dose of nitrogen in the month of November .
By the end of December flowers begin to bloom after developing .
Cut flower stems with the aid of scissors at that time when the lower two buds of flower stem begin to open .
Mint belongs to the group of herbaceous plants of lemiacy family , perfumed oil is obtained from it through water distillation .
In India in one lakh fifty thousand hectare area farming of mentha is being done .
Currently India is at the first position in the world in the area of mentha production .
Environmental factors -LRB- light , temperature , lack of water , nutrition and salt -RRB- and plant factors -LRB- age of plant , oil pool , photosynthesis , plant growth index -RRB- determine the produce of the crop and quality of oil .
In environmental factors relationship among duration of day , temperature and effect of nutrition has been found .
The duration of light has a positive impact on the flowering and growth of peppermint plants .
In the situation of longer days more amount of menthol and menthone is achieved from plants .
The less amount of menthol and menthone is found in plants of shorter duration .
In the Bergamot mint , as a result of long duration , flowers were actuated in non flowering plants .
Mint plants are less tolerant towards salts .
The synthesis and collection of vaporizing perfumed oil in mint plants happens in the glands present in leaves .
These glands are found on both surface of the leaves .
Leaves have two kinds of glands which are known by the name capitate and peltate .
The external skin of both the side of the leaves of these glands can be seen with the help of a microscope .
Capitate glands contain secreting cells .
The synthesis ans collection of oil takes place in these secreting cells .
It is known from a study conducted on developed leaves of Japanese mint that young leaves are more active in collecting oil .
photosynthesis is the track for initial metabolism unit of aroma oils .
Because leaves are a place for oil synthesis and conservation , therefore photosynthesis ability plays an important role in oil conservation .
Sapling growth alters the growth and development of regulatory plants therefore they are used to increase the production of agricultural produce .
This production affects the procurement and quality of oil in peppermint and spearmint plants .
Mint is also known by the name mentha arvensis , methol mint or carnmint .
The other varieties of mint such as bergamot mint , spear mint , scotch spearmint and peppermint are also being cultivated in various parts of the world , but the mint which is the most successfully cultivated in Indian context is . .
Its demand is continuously increasing because of its excessive use and new products based on this are being explored incessantly .
There is a presumption that every year its demand will increase by 10-15 % .
The second major reason for its increasing demand apart from local market is its international demand which is incessantly increasing .
Currently the major countries that are producing it in the world are - India , China , Korea , Perugway , Taiwan , Argentina , Brazil , Pakistan , Japan , Nepal etc .
Farming of mint has begun to be done in large areas of Madhya Pradesh , Uttar Pradesh , Punjab , Haryana , Gujarat , Bihar , Maharashtra and Rajasthan .
Its farming is done in Nainital and Udham Singh Nagar of Uttarakhand as well .
Its farming has been successful in various parts of Madhya Pradesh and in almost every district of the state its farming has begun .
Its farming receives a boost in those parts of Maharashtra , Bihar and Rajasthan where water is found in abundance .
Along with this its demand is constantly increasing in indigenous market also .
In the context of Madhya Pradesh there has been significant contribution of Centre for Entrepreneurship Development , Madhya Pradesh -LRB- CEDMAP -RRB- in making farming of Japanese mint popular .
Farming of mint can be successfully done in those areas where there is relatively light winters and summers are extremely warm .
Thus hot tropical climate is more appropriate for its cultivation .
In this regard , such regions where the average temperature of crop is between 20-400 is supposed to be appropriate for its cultivation .
-LRB- Actually it can also tolerate temperature up to 450 Celsius -RRB- .
From this perspective , the climate of some regions of Madhya Pradesh , Uttar Pradesh , Punjab , Haryana , Maharashtra , Gujrat , Bihar and Rajasthan are supposed to be quite good for its cultivation .
Such a soil has been found useful for farming of mint in which there is enough amount of bio remains and in which there is arrangement of water drainage .
In this way sandy , loamy soil , clayey , loamy kind of soil and light black soil are appropriate for its farming .
PH mean of soil should be from 6 - 8 .
Excessive acidic or excessive alkaline soil where water clogging is more are not considered appropriate for its farming .
From this point of view this can be successfully grown in almost all areas in India .
Farming of japanese mint is possible in only those areas where water for irrigation is available in abundant amount .
Its farming in unirrigated regions is not possible .
For irrigation plus irrigation can also be used and sprinkler system as well .
Mentha crop can be taken as an annual crop or also as a single crop in an year .
If its methodical farming is done then its three harvests can be taken in a year .
However , the fertility of the soil can be maintained by doing the cultivation of Japanese mint in a cycle and growing it with potatoes , rice , mustard etc .
Firstly , the farm where Japanese mentha is proposed to be cultivated should be properly made fragile by doing deep ploughing .
If there is scope of the growth of termite or worms in the concerned farm then it is beneficial to put neem oil cakes in the field at the rate of 4 quintal  acre land .
Sowing of mint is done through its roots who are called .
They are obtained by the last crop -LRB- old plants -RRB- of sacurse mentha .
Generally for one acre of farming 100-125 k.g sacurse are required because the nursery remains filled with water .
Hence these sacurse keep floating on water .
These sacurse are slowly beaten using broom so that the sacurse carries some mud .
Meanwhile the water should be supplied from time to time .
These plants become quite big withing 30-35 days and later they are planted in the main farm .
The process of sowing is somewhat similar which is applied for chilies , aubergine or paddy .
Mint ` s yield can be taken even after Rabi ` s yield .
The amount of seeds seem to be relatively less hence the cost incurred on seeds can be reduced .
The cost incurred in weed control is relatively less .
Directly sowing the roots : Sowing through this method is more appropriate for those regions where the farm is available for mentha cultivation from 15th January .
Settlement of plants sowed with this method begins in 2-3 weeks .
After sowing them once mentha crop can be harvested 2 to 3 times in a year .
Thus the first harvesting should be done after 100-120 days of sowing and the later harvesting is done after every 70-80 days .
It is important to harvest crop in time .
Otherwise its leaves begin to shed after turning yellow , due to which produce is effected .
When flowers come on 40 percent plants in farm then one should consider it the most appropriate time for harvesting .
Approximately one week prior to harvest irrigation of farm should be stopped .
Generally 10 o ` clock in the morning -LRB- bright and sunny day -RRB- is considered to be best for its harvesting .
Palmarosa -LRB- Cymbopogon martinii -RRB- is a perennial plant producing aromatic oil .
It gives a good produce in tropical to warm climate .
Its farming is done commercially in Madhya Pradesh , Maharashtra , Andhra Pradesh , Karnataka , Tamil Nadu , and Uttar Pradesh .
Its farming in India is done in around 2,500 hectares .
Annual production of its oil is approximately 780 tonne .
Its oil is used in making perfumes , to give fragrance to edible stuff and making soap .
Apart form that this oil is also being brought in use for aromatherapy .
For palmarosa sandy to loamy soil stays appropriate where there is abundant arrangement of water drainage .
This crop can also be grown in saline and alkaline , less fertile soil .
For the growth of this plant 25-40 Celsius temperature and 75 - 150 cm rain is appropriate .
Its growth is less from November to February in India .
Farming of this crop can also be done in unirrigated regions .
The sowing of this crop can be done directly with seeds , by preparing nursery or by planting the root part of old plant at a distance of 60 x 30 c . m .
The distance between lines and plants depend upon the fertility of soil .
To prepare nursery one should prepare water drainage equipped high beds of 1x1 meter .
The beds should be mabe even by mixing rotten cow dung manure or wormicompost in appropriate amount .
Then after it is essential to spread the mixture of seeds and fine soil -LRB- 1:2 -RRB- evenly in the beds .
In nursery seed germinates within seven days .
Spraying a solution of 1.5 % urea after 20 days of putting up the nursery is helpful in the production of healthy nursery .
Nursery becomes worth transplantation 30 - 40 days later .
While transplanting standing of 2 - 3 cm water in farm is appropriate .
After the growth of a plant has begun water should be given at an interval of 10 - 15 days .
Where there is lack of water there from April to end of June or till it rains farmer use mulching after plant ` s growth .
With its use along with water conservation weeds can be controlled .
Weed control has a direct relation with produce .
Its importance increase in fragrant crops , because some weeds can effect the quality of their oils .
Amount of weedicides , depends on soil type and available organic carbon in it .
In the first year 3-4 weeding is necessary .
After every harvest , it is beneficial to give 25 kg nitrogen in the form of urea through sprinkling method on there being enough moisture .
Apart from this every year , it is important to give 60 kg phosphorus and 40 kg potash for a good crop produce .
4 - 5 months after sowing or transplanting crop gets ready for harvest .
Oil is found in the leaves and inflorescence of this crop therefore the harvesting of upper part 15 - 20 cm above land is done .
For maximum oil production it is best to harvest crop after it has flowered .
Number of harvests per year depends on soil fertility , climate , and crop management but even then one gets 2-3 harvests in north India and 4-5 in south India .
Being a perennial plant this crop stays beneficial till 3-4 years .
Growth of crop is specially less in winters in north India .
Oil production from its branch is done from water or vapor distillation process .
After harvesting if crop is distilled after drying in shade for 24 hours then fuel can be conserved to a lot extent .
0.3-0 .5 percent of oil is found in this crop .
In the first year 250-300 quintal vegetation production takes place .
Two months of July-August are very important for horticulturists from the perspective of agricultural task .
That is , apart from doing other gardening tasks in July-August , priority should be given to create new orchards and prepare plants for new fruit trees .
Dushhary , langa , lucknow safeda , gulab khas and other varieties that ripe meanwhile should be harvested and sent to market in July .
The harvesting of fruits should be done with the help of bag tied on bamboo else the fruit might be injured on falling and they might begin to rot while packaging and transportation .
They should be sent to the market by loading them on airy trucks after packaging .
If there is adequate rainfall then the work of sowing in the pits dug during May-June should be completed in the month of August .
There is fear of plants getting damaged because of the heat of soil if the plants are sown in July .
One should be careful that sowing is done in the evening or on the day when there is little rainfall .
After the sowing the soil across the plant should be properly pressed and little irrigation should be done immediately .
The plant should be prepared through viniyar grafting in August .
In order to prepare new plants for the next year , the seeds of ripe fruits should be collected and sown in the nursery for root petiole .
The work of sowing should be initiated in the pits that are dug during May-June .
If the orchards have problem of stem borer moth then the bores in the stem of the plant should be cleaned and they should be covered with cotton ball drenched in kerosene solution or sulphas tablet before sealing the bores with clay .
The plants should be inspected after 15 days and if any new bores are seen then this process should be repeated again .
The farmer brothers should prepare papaya nursery during July-August , the place of nursery should be free from water-stagnation because papaya is more admissible towards fungal diseases .
The seeds should be treated with any anti fungal such as therum -LRB- 2gm .
g seed -RRB- and should be sown in beds that are 15-20 c.m long .
After the sprouting of the seeds a solution of 0.2 % therum should be sprayed .
The old orchards should be free from weeds and best arrangements they should have best quality of water drainage facility and in order to prevent the rotting disease the stems and branches of the plant should be essentially sprayed with a solution of 0.3 % blytox and the stem should be covered with soil from all sides .
Gooseberry : The fertilized embryos of gooseberry that were lying for a long time start taking the shape of fruit during July .
The growth of the fruits is quite fast during this period therefore manure and fertilizers should be properly mixed in the soil else it adversely affects the growth of fruits .
There is fury of the attack of rust and other fungal generated diseases on soft and small fruits from 15th July till the end of August .
Therefore the gooseberry orchards should be sprayed with a fungicide named Bavistine -LRB- 2gm water -RRB- .
In July the task of sowing a new garden can be undertaken .
Make ample arrangements for water drainage in old gardens .
For the control of fruit rotting disease spray borax solution -LRB- o. 6 percent -RRB- at an interval of 15 days .
If new gardens were unable to be sowed in July then do this task at the end of August .
Water should not be allowed to stagnate near the newly planted trees else one might get complaints of plants dying .
Good quality crops of grapes are not found in north India .
There can be two reasons , one is that there is little time between the flowering and ripening of fruits in grapes -LRB- 90-100 days -RRB- , while in northern India this period consists of 4-5 months .
Secondly , monsoon rains begin when the grapes ripe in the last week of June and because of this the fruits break and start rotting .
There is problem of breaking and rotting of fruits during this month .
There should be arrangement for providing manure and fertilizer after the harvesting of fruits .
There is fury of anthracnose disease during August .
Hence blytox -LRB- 2gm water -RRB- should be sprayed in time to prevent them .
The fruits of key lime and lemon ripe and become ready in July , arrangements should be made to harvest and send them in markets .
In this very month the task of sowing a new garden can also be done .
Keep the nursery clean .
In order to get rid of canker disease a solution of streptocycline -LRB- 2.5 gm per 100 lit water -RRB- and neem cake -LRB- 5 k. g lit water -RRB- should be sprayed .
If the task of sowing could not be completed in July then complete it in August .
Delicious varieties ripe and become ready in August .
Production of jackfruit is done in the entire nation leaving aside some states of India .
In eastern Uttar states , Bihar , North-eastern states and south India many varieties of jackfruit are grown .
The crops used as vegetable should be harvested and sold in markets when they are raw .
at some places especially in south India , the ripe jack-fruits are used in food , therefore the jack-fruit to be used as fruit should be harvested when the fruits start giving little aroma .
Finish the task of sowing new gardens also by the last week of August .
In spite of planting the seed plants , grafts and vamps should be bought from an authentic nursery .
Keep appropriate arrangement of water drainage in new and old gardens .
For the onion crop of kharif season , plants should be sown in the first week of July .
Be careful while selecting varieties because joints are not formed in the rabi varieties during rainy season .
M53 , Agrifound Darkred etc varieties have been recommended for Kharif .
Ready pots should be transplanted in farms in the last week of August .
Also keep an eye on onions in storage , because in July-August a lot of onion rots in storage .
Keep air circulation appropriate in store room and do not let amount of moisture rise .
Sow creeper vegetables like pumpkin , bottle gourd , snake gourd and bitter gourd etc in July .
Since they scatter on ground during rainy season there is more fury of insects and diseases on creeper vegetables .
Therefore these vegetables should be spread on wire fences or wooden scaffold .
With this more produce is also received and attack of insects-diseases is also less .
The creepers sown in April-May should be plucked and destroyed because by this time would have been yielding less produce and they might spread bugs and diseases to new crops .
Sow leafy vegetables like spinach , amarnathus , corriander etc in high embossed lanes on ridges .
In the rainy season , there is heavy attack on leafy vegetables by the plant eater bugs and because of this these vegetables do not give satisfying prices in market .
To stop attrition of farmers from farming alternative and lucrative crop systems need to be developed .
In this direction turmeric is an important crop , because its farming can also be done in shady places .
Therefore farmers can do turmeric farming in their own gardens as well .
Further , good profit can be achieved by using turmeric with red chilies , maize and cereals like ragi etc . as a mixed crop .
Turmeric is important in cosmetics , auspicious tasks along with religious ceremonies and deity praying etc as well .
The way in which rice and wheat hold importance in food grain crops in that very way turmric holds an important place in spice crops .
The use of turmeric is done not only in the form of spices but in dye , medicines and cosmetics as well .
It works as an antioxidant .
Along with developing immunity system to fight against diseases in body it is helpful in controlling level of cholesterol and opening blockage of blood in veins .
Turmeric farming in India is front-runner in producing and importing countries .
Turmeric plant 2-3 feet tall and broad till 6-7 inch , leaves - oblong , hastate and the front tip is pointed .
In its main root bulbs similar to ginger sit , which are called as turmeric .
Turmeric can be primarily grown in various zonal regions and around 1500 met above sea level .
Warm and damp season is appropriate for its farming .
It can be cultivated in any fertile land in dry land or irrigated conditions but sandy or loamy soil is best for its cultivation .
There should be fertility and appropriate arrangement of water drainage in land .
Preparation of farming should be done before monsoon rains .
It should be ploughed with plough or harrow that purls soil once .
After taking out grass etc from farm it should be made plain using a trowel .
Both root bulb or stem bulb could be used for the cultivation of turmeric .
20-25 gm of root bulb or 15-20 gm of stem bulb should be used for seeds .
For the purpose of sowing one should remember while making a choice that there should be minimum two eyes in the tubes .
About 6 to 8 tubes are required for the purpose of sowing .
Turmeric farming can also be done through crop rotation .
We can grow sugarcane , chilies , onions , garlic , pulses with turmeric or they can be also grown with vegetables as mixed crop .
In West Bengal turmeric is cultivated with mangoes , jack fruit , betel nut , coconut and litchi .
With crop rotation system turmeric can be grown with any kind of crop .
Whether they are cereals , pulses or orchard crops .
Turmeric can be grown with every crop .
Primarily three methods are adopted for planting turmeric - on plain land , on ridges and on raised beds .
In the conditions of fertile sandy loamy and soil with good drainage system good yield of turmeric can be achieved if cultivated on plain land .
In the ridges method the height of the ridges should be 25-30 c . m .
The distance between ridges and plants should be precedent only .
3-5 met high and 1.5 met breadth of beds are more convenient in raised beds .
It is appropriate to leave a gap of 40 c.m between two beds .
While sowing the bales of turmeric one should make sure that the eyes of the bales are upwards and the depth should not be more than 4-5 c . m .
The bulbs should be properly covered with soil after sowing .
Turmeric requires more nutritive elements as compared to other crops which can not be fulfilled by ordinary soil .
Further , in order to get more produce , fertilizer should be put in appropriate and balanced amount .
Immediately after the sowing of turmeric , they should be covered with 12-15 tonne green leaves .
Growth in production has been witnessed when this process is used after 40 -90 days of sowing , weeding and using the left amounts of manure .
This process is called mulching .
Weeding in turmeric should not be more than three times .
Since turmeric is a long term crop it requires adequate irrigation .
Generally turmeric does not seem to be affected more by bugs and diseases but still sometimes the it is affected by bugs and diseases .
Shoot bud is the most harmful bug of turmeric .
Presence of holes in pseudo stem -LRB- from where the excreta of bug passes out -RRB- and withering of central stem -LRB- shoot -RRB- are symptoms of the fury of insects .
The old insects are small whose orange colored wings have small and black patches .
Their outbreak occurs during rainy season .
The larva of leaf rollers cuts leaves and they stick to each other .
Larva eats the twisted leaves from within .
The old , medium sized ones which have brown & black wings have butterfly shapes .
To control them in the situation of severe infection a solution of 3gm carbaryl and water should be sprayed .
Rhizome scale infects rhizomes in farms and repository .
It sucks the juice of plants in farm .
The plant starts withering when there is severe outbreak in the farm .
The bulbs start withering if they are affected by bugs in the repository and it also affects the sprouting of buds .
The plants affected due to this this bug should be plucked and thrown so that other plants are not affected and the bulbs should be immersed in the solution of 0.075 % quinol before storing and sowing .
Leaf Blotch : This disease is visible on any side of leaf in the form of oval , rectangular and uneven brown patches .
The plant also seem to be burnt if there is severe fury .
Leaf spot : The sighting of brown spots of various sizes on the upper layer are symptoms of this disease .
These spots are oval , white or brown in the center of leaf .
Effected leaves dry up suddenly , due to which rhizome ` s development and harvest both are effected .
Rhizome rot : Due to this disease rotting in rhizomes begin from the edges and leaves dry up .
The collar portion of pseudo stem becomes soft because of which the plant fall down .
When this disease is seen in standing crops then the ridge on which turmeric is sown should be sprayed with a solution of 0.3 % dithane M-45 or 0.3 % sire-san .
From February to April root of turmeric is taken out after digging and is collected in a heap after cleaning .
Through distillation of turmeric leaves 20 to 25 kg oil is also gained .
In the processing of turmeric mainly four stages like - boiling , drying , polishing and dying are included .
After digging safe storage of other bulbs from root bulb is done .
Roots are boiled after being washed well .
While boiling , lime water or sodium bi carbonate is used .
Boiled roots are dried in sun .
At night these roots should be collected and covered .
According to state and intensity of sunlight roots dry up completely in 10-15 days -LRB- moisture up to 6 percent -RRB- .
For putting color the turmeric bulbs are rubbed together which causes luster in the outer cover of the bulbs .
Putting color through this process is called polishing .
For this drum  polisher run on hand driven machines are also popular .
Good color of turmeric attracts customers .
Thus for the dyeing of turmeric , turmeric color is added at the rate of 2 k.g  quintal dry bul .
This process is called dyeing of turmeric .
90 % of turmeric produced is consumed in India itself .
The remaining 10 % is exported to other countries .
Major among them are Srilanka , South Africa , Iran , United States of America and Britain .
Because of the ever increasing per person land holding size also farmers are unable to earn more profit in farming .
Hence yield and income in farming can be increased by adopting other crops .
Pomegranate -LRB- Punica granatum -RRB- is a healthy fruit .
Its use in the form of ayurvedic medicine is being done from the ancient times itself .
Pomegranate farming in India is being done in almost all regions , but its commercial farming is being done in only some parts of the country .
Most of its farming is done in Maharashtra and Gujarat state .
Horticulture of pomegranate is done at a very small scale in India .
Apart form India pomegranate farming is done at a very large scale in Spain , Morocco , Egypt , Iran , Arab , Afghanistan .
Loamy clay soil with more amount of lime if best for pomegranate .
Sandy land is not appropriate for pomegranate .
It can also be grown gradient and rocky regions of mountains .
Pomegranate plant is very tolerant , but cold and dry climate is best for the farming of pomegranate farming .
In cold and dry states its fruits are fragrant , sweet and tasty .
Pomegranate is quite tolerant towards dryness and irrigation is essential in its field for good production .
In India many varieties of pomegranate are found .
Primarily they can be divided in two groups .
One evergreen and the other deciduous .
Dholka : This variety is primarily grown in regions around Ahmadabad .
Fruits are big , red-yellow in shape and spots of various colors are seen on the skin .
Fruits of this species are juicy and sweet .
The variety with dual flower : This variety does not produce fruits .
Its flowers are for decoration .
In flowering state all stamen take the form of petals .
G.V.-1 : Fruits of this variety are big in size pulp in pink , juicy and tasty to eat .
Japanese small : plant is small and sprawling .
The peel of its fruit is green - yellow .
Muscut white : Plant is big and with branches .
Kandhari : Plant is straight and hard .
Its fruits are big and of purple color .
The grains are semicircular red and juicy .
The taste of fruits is sweet and with some sourness .
Patiala : Plant is of medium size .
Fruits of this species are also of medium size .
The vegetation of pomegranate can be done by both seeds and botanical method .
One should take mature wood for grafting which is 24 cm long and 1.0 cm thick .
The vegetation of pomegranate can also be done using gooty method but since grafting method is easy , this method is being used practically .
Plants prepared through grafting become worth planting after a year .
The distance of plants is kept till around 4-5 meter and monsoon is the appropriate time to sow these plants .
Because of being dryness tolerant there is not much requirement of excessive moisture .
Three-four irrigation in summers and one irrigation in winter is enough .
The trimming of pomegranate plants is done as per requirement .
It is very essential to trim when the plants are dense and there are several branches .
In the beginning 20-25 fruits come in pomegranate trees .
Due to appropriate care 200-250 fruits per tree are received very easily .
As per the flowering , fruits are also seen many times a year and fruits are chosen among various seasons .
Through color changing of pomegranate the maturity of fruits is determined .
The color of ripe fruits is according to the species .
The production of fruits depend on the variety , age , manure and irrigation .
Average yield of 150-200 fruits per year can be procured from one plant .
Due to the cover of its cover being hard it can be conserved for a long time .
Due to conservation the taste and quality of fruits increase .
To send from one place to the other pomegranate fruits are sent by keeping them in cane baskets .
In good species of pomegranates fruit juice is upto 40 percent .
0.75 to 1.50 percent citric acid is found in its juice .
Generally : pomegranate fruits are eaten fresh .
Its juice is very useful for health .
People like its juice more .
Every part of pomegranate fruit can be brought in use in one or the other form .
Its peel is extremely beneficial in cough , dysentry and cholera .
Many Ayurvedic medicines are prepared from the seed of fruits .
Their peels are also used to dye clothes .
The grains of seedy fruits are dried and used as spices and also to add aroma to vegetables .
Dry seeds are called anardana .
By soaking these seeds in water tasty and beneficial sauce can be made .
Fruit boring worm , Virachola isocrates is the most horrible enemy of pomegranates .
This insect is seen in almost all pomegranate producing regions .
Such fruits look healthy from the outside but becomes sore from inside .
To save fruits from insects one should tie a polythene bag on fruits and small flowers .
Winged bean is a remarkable miracle of divinity .
Its farming was first done in 1799 .
These days the cultivation of quadri-beans are being done in kitchen gardens of Kerala , Maharashtra , Bihar and Odisha , West Bengal , Assam and Tamil Nadu but in the world large scale cultivation of quadri-beans are done in Nigeria , Philippines , Vietnam , Bangladesh , Myanmar , Thailand , Indonesia , Srilanka and Malaysia .
People from various places call winged bean with various names .
Immense use is done of roots , leaves , flowers and fruits of this bean that is of all parts .
Therefore it is also called tropical soyabean .
Its English name is winged bean and botanical name is psophocarpus tetragonolobus which is a member of leguminous plant species .
The soft flowers of winged beans are primarily used for making salad , soup and vegetables .
After 55-60 days of sowing the surface of winged beans start flowering .
The beans can be plucked after 14-15 days of flowering .
It has abundance of carbohydrates and vitamin-A .
Tasty vegetable , salad and soup are made of beans .
The flowers of winged bean are fried in oil and used as a stuffing for vegetables like tomato , capsicum and bitter gourd .
Use of seeds of ripe beans is done like peas .
In India people eat mature beans by cooking them in milk and jaggery .
The soft flowers fried in oil makes the food more tasty and balanced .
From the point of nutrition there is none like winged bean .
The underground roots of this bean is starchy and these soft and fleshy roots are used to make food items by boiling , cooking and frying like potatoes .
A lot of similarity has been found in amino acids present in seed of soyabean and winged bea .
In seeds of winged beans there are carbohydrates 33 percent , protein 38.8 percent and 16.5 percent fat .
Farming of winged bean is done in areas with damp and hot climate .
16-250 Celcius temperature is considered appropriate for making of bulbs in plants .
For the production of this bean the annual rainfall should be 300-400 c . m .
Otherwise this is a famine-tolerant crop .
Plants blossom in days with short duration .
Acidic soil whose pH value is less than 7 is better for this bean .
Abundance of bio-matter in the soil leaves a great impact on the production of Sem .
The farm should be left in summer after tilling with the plough .
Winged bean should be sown right after the first rains in monsoon .
The yield gradually decreases with the delay in sowing .
They should be generally sown at a distance of 120 c.m in rows .
The winged beans are provided climbing support .
Hence they are provided a support of branched bamboo .
Where there is facility , the plants can be climbed on strong gauzy stage of wire .
A couple of plants of winged bean can be allowed to climb by making a small stage in the kitchen garden .
After every weeding process , 75 k.g of urea hectare should be put and properly mixed in the soil .
One should keep plucking the fruits as per requirement .
The fruits are also a good source of minerals and vitamins .
It means that winged beans are cheap option for nutritive safety .
Onion is a significant vegetable crop of our country , which is produced at commercial level in the entire country .
In the present times it is a necessity of every household which apart from creating taste and aroma to various food items also contains medicinal values .
Of all the qualities of the onion Pungency is the most major one .
The taste and aroma among of all the members of onion family are related to sulfur .
It is a major component .
Today , lack of sulfur is found in various regions of India , and the major reason behind this is excessive use of chemical fertilizers , sulfur free fertilizers , soil erosion and loss of sulfur from the soil in other forms .
Because of the significance of sulfur in crop production today it has been recognized as the `` second nutritive element `` .
Onion is a sulfur loving crop and the symptoms of scarcity & excess of sulfur is clearly seen in the crops but one does not know them due to lack of knowledge which reduces its production and storage capacity .
The supply of extra sulfur to the soil is clearly reflected on the crops .
There is unique significance of nutrient sulfur in onion crop because it is a major component of allin , sycloallin and thipropenol which controls the taste , aroma and medicinal value and pungency respectively .
Hence the use of sulfur fertilizers in onions is extremely essential and beneficial .
The soil which has deficiency or lack of sulfur is recommended for the testing and analysis of sub soil and the amount of sulfur in plants .
The fodder crops of hybrid varieties with huge production capacity such as bermuda grass alfalfa takes more amount of sulfur from the ground and hence they are more responsive as compared to grain crops .
The leaching of sulfur : The crops grown in coarse soil is more responsive towards sulfur .
The level of sulfur in rivers and lakes is higher as compared to deep wells .
Hence analyzing sulphur amount in irrigation water is good .
Papaya has an important place among fruits cultivated in India .
It can produced all year round .
Less area is required for its plants .
There is scope for its extensive farming due to obtainment of harvest in the year of sowing itself and obtaining more production in per unit area .
In papaya fruits nutritional elements are present in abundant amount .
It is a good source of sugar and vitamin A .
It is used in making jam , sauce , petha sweet etc apart from the fruit .
Raw fruits are eaten in the form of dish , halwa and kheer after cooking .
Papene is made by drying the milk that comes out of its raw fruit and it is used in the manufacture of cosmetic products , in industries and making medicines for stomach ailments , mouth ulcer and skin diseases etc .
Papaya is a crop of tropical climate but is can also be sucessfully cultivated in medium subtropical climate .
Extreme chilling winter and strong winds in summer adversely affects the growth and flowering of plants .
The success of papaya farming depends of temperature .
In the cold weather on the temperature being 12-40 celcius growth and production is effected .
This is very sensitive towards dew and swift breeze .
Soil with mean of 6.5-7 .0 PH is the best for the farming of papayas .
In India its farming is also done in heavy alluvial soil at the river banks .
Pusa Delicious : Its plants are medium-sized , in which fruits begin to grow from a height of 80 cms .
This is a good variety from the viewpoint of the benefits of fruits .
Around 50 k.g fruits plant are obtained and the fruits have less seeds .
This variety is Gynodioecious .
Therefore fruits are obtained from all their plants .
Pusa majesty : The storage capacity of its fruits is good and it is appropriate for sending into far off markets .
40 k.g of fruit per plant can be obtained from this variety .
Pusa giant : This is a diocese species which gives more production .
This variety grows fast .
Their plants are strong .
Hence the places were strong winds blow .
There also they can be successfully cultivated .
C.O-4 : The pulp of this variety is thick and yellow in color .
Purple color is found in all the parts of the plant .
The average weight of the fruits is 1.0-1 .5 k . g .
C.O. - : This variety has been primarily developed to grow papene .
14-15 gram dry papene is obtained from every fruit .
C. O. - : This variety is appropriate both for eating fresh and for papene production .
Sunrise solo : This variety is gynodioecious whose pulp is pink in color .
Pots of papaya are prepare in beds and polythene bags .
Put 20-25 k.g of manure in the prepared beds and if there is clay soil then it should be as per requirement .
The seed should be sown at a depth of 1 c.m and at a distance of 3-4 c . m .
The seed sown in rows are covered with a mixture of cow-dung manure and soil .
The beds should be covered with grass and butea frondosa leaves in order to save them from scorching heat .
Gently irrigate the field everyday using an irrigating device .
The plants should be planted in farm when they are 15-20 cm long .
Firstly they should be cultivated twice or thrice with the plough or harrow that reverses the soil so that the soil becomes brittle and leveled .
In northern India plantation is generally carried during June-July .
Papaya is also sown during February-March .
Pulses such as peas , fenugreek , gram , french beans and soybean etc . can be taken as an inter crop in papaya cultivation .
Chilies , tomatoes , lady ` s finger and aubergine should not be grown as inter crops .
The irrigation should be done in such a manner that the water does not comes in direct contact with the stem .
The weeds should be removed from time to time and little ploughing should be done .
Less weeding and ploughing would be required if mulching is done .
The fruits should be harvested with their stem when the fruits are fully mature and the top part of the fruit starts yellowing .
The rotten , diseased and ill formed fruits should be separated after harvesting .
Red spider : It is a major bug of papaya .
The attack of this bug makes the fruits scratchy , black colored and the leaves become yellow .
Magot eats the pulp of ripe fruits which causes rotting in fruits .
Collect the fallen and damaged fruits and separate the fruits damaged by birds .
Ring spot virus : It is a viral disease which is transmitted by aphid .
This disease can cause damage up to 50-60 % .
Because of this disease the new leaves show chlorosis .
The leaves seem to be cut and the growth of the plant stops .
The diseased plants should be plucked and destroyed and aphid should be controlled .
Leaf curl : It is also a viral disease which is spread by white fly .
The leaves curl in this disease .
This disease causes damage up to 70-80 % .
The production of papaya depends upon its variety , age of plants , fertility of soil , irrigation , care etc .
On an average 40-50 k.g fruits can be obtained from one plant .
Cocoon production has a significant place in saving the environment from crisis .
This is the reason , silk industry has played a significant role in the lives of tribes of Jharkhand .
These tribes are playing a triple role by producing silk .
On one hand they have become independent and on the other they are playing the role of a Sentinel of environment .
The third good thing is that the migration from villages have stopped .
These days around 30 tribes of Jharkhand are engaged in silk production .
The number of females among them is more .
After finishing their household work the females are playing significant role in producing silk .
Jharkhand occupies the third position in silk production in the country because of the eagerness of these tribes .
Around 60000 worm rearers are earning their livelihood as silk providers .
This industry based on agriculture provides employment to millions of families .
Sal and Indian laurel trees are found in abundance in Jharkhand .
The food of silkworm are found on these trees .
The fibers found in Jharkhand are are totally Eco .
That is why there is international demand for Jharkhand fibers .
At the international level Jharkhand silk is known as Kuchai silk .
The expansion of silk industry can be guessed by the fact that 75 thousand handlooms are functioning in the state .
Here clothes are woven with silk thread .
Every year the Jharkhand government gets foreign exchange worth around fifty crore rupees because of foreign export .
Further , silk clothes from Jharkhand are being sold in Delhi , Mumbai and Bangalore through silk emporiums .
Now silk emporiums are being opened on airports in the entire country .
Hopefully it will give heights to the Jharkhand silk industry in the future .
The Jharkhand government has signed an MOU with Handloom and handicraft export corporation , Govt . of India .
After the development of silkworm rearing industry , the large scale migration from villages to cities has stopped .
Raghvendra from Dumka district says that he has planted Arjun plants in around 1.5 acre land .
He is rearing silkworm using these plants .
He says that cocoon grows in large amount in Arjun plants .
That is why growing Arjun trees is more beneficial than growing other trees .
Because of the efforts of silk department in Jharkhand , farmers are getting every possible help from the government .
Silkworm is being produced using scientific methods .
Efforts are being made to bring increase in tusser production .
Clothes are being woven in Gonda through silk industry .
Forestation is also being done speedily because of silk production .
The truth is that silkworm rearing is an agriculture based industry which has great scope for the development of rural economy .
Silk industry is economic activity which is eco-friendly , constant and requires hard work .
For the last three decades the silk production of India has increased and become more than that of Japan and former Soviet Union , who were once major silk producing countries .
Today India is the second major raw silk producing country of the world after China .
Apart from being the largest consumer of silk , India is the only country that produces five kinds of silk - mulberry , tusser , oak tusser , ari and moga silk and it imports large amount of raw mulberry silk and silk garments from Chi .
These varieties of silk are produced by the tribal people of middle and north-east India .
The Central silk Board has carried a professional test on the cultivation of natural silk fiber of laria tusser species and the results are quite encouraging .
During the entire rearing period the up-keeping of silkworm is done very carefully and good variety of mulberry leaves are used for its food .
Separate rearing houses and equipment are required for providing favorable conditions for silkworm .
5-10 crops can be reared in a year and the lifespan of every crop is around 70-80 days .
V-1 and S-36 are mulberry species that provide good produce and are extremely appropriate for silkworm rearing .
Both these species provide nutritive leaves which are extremely important for larva in silkworm rearing .
The leaves of S-36 species are heart-shaped , thick and bright and light colored .
The leaves are highly moist and contain more nutritive elements .
20-24 thousand kilogram of mulberry leaves can be obtained annually .
Mulberry silkworm rearing is a domestic occupation completely .
It requires 24-28 degree Celsius temperature and 70-80 % humid climate .
Mulberry silkworm can be grown in various climatic conditions and in soils of expanded regions .
Good produce of cocoon can be obtained by adopting better methods .
But leaves providing best quality of production are an essential condition for this .
The rearing of silkworm takes place during larva period crossing five different phases .
In the larva period it is kept in an exclusively built silkworm rearing rod .
Further , in order to get high quality of silk , proper management and intense care is taken at right time .
In order to make the rearing houses and equipment free from infection , they should be cleaned twice .
It is extremely essential to have the basis of silkworm larva at right time to obtain high quality cocoon .
It is recommended to have rotary basis for producing high quality cocoon .
Separate verandas are required to hang rotary mounting .
Cocoon crops are harvested in six days .
A time period of additional one day should be given during winters .
Around 700-900 kg . of cocoon crops can be cultivated annually in a mulberry garden .
Mulberry plants are produced when young condition through cuttings or flat bed system at commercial level .
Success of germination and strength of plant is effected by competitive weeds , soil ` s moisture , and temperature of soil to a very large extent .
Not only fruit of coconut its peel is also effective .
The extent to which raw coconut is useful from the point of view of health , ripe coconut is full of various elements more than that .
Coconut ` s use now is done in the form of bio-diesel along with oil .
Manure is being prepared form coconut ` s fiber .
Thus it can be seen that along with health , coconut is being useful in every aspect of human life .
Coconut tree is a tree grown extensively in the entire world which provides us every necessary thing important for life .
This is a perennial and endogen plant .
Its trunk is ling and without branches .
Over the main trunk long leaves ` crown like shape is visible .
This is found at sea coast or salty places .
Its fruits are used in Hindus religious ceremonies .
Indonesia , Philippines , India and Sri Lanka are main producers of coconut and this is one of the main sources of income for these countries .
In India although coconut is found in the form of everywhere , but long queues of its trees are seen everywhere in Kerala , West Bengal , and Orrisa .
It is production is done in Mumbai in Maharashtra and coastal areas and Goa .
As much as its fruits is useful its trees also look attractive .
Apart from food and water various parts of coconut tree are used in manufacturing of door mats , mats , furniture , charcoal , manure etc .
The raw fruits of coconut are called dab and the water inside it is considered good from the point of view of health and taste .
somebody likes the water of coconut and others like its cream .
Coconut is not only tasty to eat but it is also considered to be quite nutritious .
It contains adequate amount of fibers , vitamins and minerals .
There is no match for this in kitchen , beauty and religious matters .
The coconut which is tough from outside and soft from inside is also called Sriphal .
Coconut destroys the virus which is responsible for causing diseases such as influenza , shingles , chickenpox , hepatitis , AIDS etc .
Coconut also destroys the bacteria responsible for growing ulcer , throat infection , tooth ailment and pneumonia .
Coconut provides instant energy to the body .
coconut contains substantial amount of calories .
coconut protects the body from the harmful effects of the ultra violet rays of the Sun .
Coconut is useful for the wrinkles appearing on body and the skin becoming languish .
coconut has a cooling effect .
Coconut water satisfies light thirst .
When in cholera puking does not end for a long time then the patient should be immediately given coconut water to drink .
Giving coconut paste to growing children during summers is beneficial in the muscular cramps of their intestine .
coconut is highly beneficial for the cure of bile ailments .
For this mix coconut nucleus , juice and white sandal powder .
Soak 10 grams of this mixture in water at night .
Strain and drink it in empty stomach in the morning .
The effect would be apparent if it is used for a week .
Coconut also saves us from obesity .
According to the scientists , the everyday food of an adult should essentially have 15 m . g . of zinc which saves from obesity .
Fresh coconut contains ample amount of zinc .
Coconut improves the insulin secretion .
It balances the amount of glucose in blood .
It also decreases the danger of diabetes .
With the consumption of coconut the process of absorption of calcium and magnesium by the body becomes better .
This makes bones strong .
It also makes teeth strong .
Coconut saves from osteoporosis that is the danger of bones becoming weak .
Coconut makes digestion process better .
Coconut is very beneficial for heart patients .
It improves the ratio of cholesterol and reduces the danger of heart disease .
Coconut helps in getting rid off intestine related problems .
It helps in dissolving kidney stone .
Patients suffering from stone should use coconut water everyday .
Coconut oil is a main source of fat in the food of millions of people , generations after generations in the entire tropical world .
It has various uses in food , medicine and industry .
Coconut oil is very good regulator of heat this is why it is an excellent oil to cook and fry .
Due to being lighter than water oil begins to float on the surface of water .
Coconut is usually used to cook food .
Edible things are fried in coconut oil .
Coconut oil is used to give fragrance to South Asian vegetables .
In comparison to other cooking oils it is least harmful on heating .
The calorie and other nutrients of coconut oil are very close to fats .
Use of coconut is also being done in the form of diesel engine fuel .
Coconut oil has been tested for use in the form of bio-diesel .
Coconut oil is transestrified to make it bio-diesel .
Currently in Philippines use of cocunut oil is being done in the form of transport fuel .
In India coconut oil has been tested to be sued in the form of engine lubricants .
Similarly in some countries coconut oil is also being used in the form of transformer oil .
Coconut oil is no less than some medicine .
With respect to health it has been considered the best oil .
Oil is extracted out of dry coconut .
The brain stays cool with coconut oil massage and benefit is gained in head ache .
Massage with this oil is very good for skin and hair .
Coconut oil is considered to be best for making the skin soft and as a moisturizer .
Hair does not dry .
There is less dandruff in head as well .
In an experiment in Philippines Children medical center it was found that coconut oil helps in increasing the breathing rate of children suffering from pneumonia .
In such situations it is beneficial to massage the children using coconut oil .
Coconut is quite important for kitchen .
It can be used as a dry fruit .
Further , small pieces of coconut and its powder can be added to various kinds of delicacies to make them tasty .
Both Barfi and laddoo is made from coconut .
Apart from this , sprinkling coconut powder on various kinds of barfis enhances their taste .
similarly rasgullas can also be made more tasty by coating them with coconut powder .
coconut can be used to enhance the taste of kheer , seawai and other delicacies prepared in kitchen .
The fibers of coconut which are thrown after consumption can be used to make barren lands fertile .
The care board of Indian government has prepared organic manure from coconut fibers .
This manure will bring revolution in agriculture sector and the land will not be barren .
Not only this it will also be effective in earthquake .
The composted coconut fibers are source of organic carbon along with up-keeping organic component of the soil .
Because of this the fertility of soil and plants can be easily grown .
The composted coconut fiber contains up to 15 % more moisture as compared to its weight and because of this the land does not become dry .
The taste seems to be incomplete if coconut chutney is not there with dosa , idli and sambar wada .
If one finds coconut chutney then its taste doubles up .
Coconut fiber is an organic vestige which along with being environment friendly is a natural solution of soil erosion and soil weathering on a large scale .
Coconut fiber is such a fiber which absorbs water in large quantity along with being very strong .
The organic sheath of coconut fiber provides support of mud to the plants for five years .
Coconut fiber is extracted from the skin of its fruit .
After this thread is prepared by carding the extracted fiber .
To prepare various products of coconut fiber weaving is done on loom .
Due to special properties of coconut its products are environment friendly and is full of bio-degradation properties .
Coconut fiber is ideal for making footmats , mats , objects used in gardens , ropes etc .
45 percent lignin is found in its fiber which makes it strongest among natural fibers .
Apart from being an insecticide it is also a fungicide and anti rotting .
This is the reason that manifold industrial use of coconut fiber is done .
