Strawberry ` s fruit is extremely soft and fragrant which on ripening turns from pink to deep red .
Iron and Vitamin C are found in generous amounts in it .
Therefore it is a beneficial fruit for patients suffering from Anemia .
Fresh , attractive , fragrant and tasty jam and ice-cream are also prepared with it .
Strawberry is originally a plant of temperate climate whose commercial farming is done primarily in the mountainous regions of North India at a limited level but there are unlimited possibilities of its successful farming in plain areas adjacent to hilly areas of Himachal Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh .
In the past few years there have been attempts of its farming in Punjab , Haryana , Dehradun , Saharanpur and lowland areas and some farmers have also been successful at it .
In our country fruits have a special importance as soon as turn of fruits come then various names of fruits are recalled .
But among all fruits strawberry is one such fruit which forcibly attracts people towards itself .
Those people who have tasted it have become its fan for ever .
Strawberry is such a fruit which is not only juicy , tasty and beautiful in looks but it has accrued a special place in upper-class society .
Possibly this fruit sold at high prices remain far from the reach of an ordinary human and is not sold on carts like popular fruits like mango , banana , orange , papaya , litchi , guava but there is enough availability of it in posh colonies and famous tourist spots .
By transplanting cutting one third part of roots after plucking open leaves while implanting , plants receive aid in settling .
By treating a plant with solution of Trichoderma -LRB- 4 grams per litre or 0.1 % vavistin -RRB- before planting help is received in controlling diseases of roots .
In the new orchids of local fruits strawberry farming can be done easily for a few initial years .
After grading fruits sending them to market in attractive packing more rate per kilo can be obtained .
Because fruits being juicy get spoiled easily due to pressure therefore along with good packing it is also necessary to ascertain timely arrangement of good transport .
Along with grown species -LRB- Chandler -RRB- other progressive species like Sweet Charlie , Douglas , Fern etc can also be grown with which production up to 200 Quintal per hectare can be received .
For the purpose of marketing , by supplying after contacting businessmen of big cities along with local market , good profit can be earned .
It is cultivated in places with temperate and equi-temperate climates .
Birthplace of European Plum -LRB- Prunus Domestica -RRB- is believed to be Western Asia and of Japanese plum -LRB- Prunus Salicina -RRB- China .
Horticultural practice of European Plum was first adopted in our country which is carried out in Kashmir , Himachal Pradesh and Uttrakhand aplenty .
Cultivation of some Japanese varieties are also being done here since quite some time .
Apart form various places of Uttrakhand its cultivation is being successfully carried in plain districts of Uttar Pradesh as well .
Its fruits are used in the form of fresh fruit drinks and delicious sauce .
Its trees shed their leaves till the beginning of winters .
After that its branches require chilling .
As far as the question of soil goes , heavy density loamy soil or clay is best suited for the cultivation of plums .
P.H. value of soil -LRB- acidic nature -RRB- is ideal between 6.0 to 7.5 , in which there is ample arrangement of water drainage .
Jambul tree : Yield of this species remain excellent and fruits ripe by the beginning of second week of May to the end of third week .
On ripening dark brown color like jambol fruit comes .
Pulp is juicy , yellow and very sweet to eat .
The fruit stone is small and easily separable from the pulp .
Apricot : Fruits get ready from the third week of May to first week of June .
Fruits are round shaped and of medium size .
On ripening deep yellow color appears .
Pulp is yellow , juicy and tasty with some sourness in consumption .
Speckled apricot : fruits of this species get ready by the end of third week from beginning of June .
Juicy plum : Fruits keep ripening from second week of June till the end of third week .
Pulp is light yellow , extra juicy and sweet like honey in consumption .
From economic point of view to extract more yield from plum fruits it is beneficial to plant trees of best quality .
They can be graded according to maturation of fruits .
First plum : Yield is regular and best .
Fruits are ready from last week of May to first week of June .
Bearing light yellow color on ripened fruits it turns red on one side .
New Plum : Fruits are from medium to big size which turn to deep red or aubergine color on ripening .
Mary Poja : Yield is good and fruits are big heartshaped .
Fruits get ready by the last week of July .
Weight of fruits is upto 70 - 80 grams .
They are used in the form of source stalk for plum plant production Beeju plants produced from the seeds of Peach , plum , apricot and wild apricot -LRB- Chullu -RRB- only .
Of them plants prepared from Wild Apricot , Plum and Apricot were found to be more appropriate for Source stalk .
Should definitely sow treated seeds in nursery by November - December by using organic manure along with appropriate arrangement of water drainage .
In the healthy plants of second year prepared from beeju plants one should put an eye in September or May-June according to the variety .
From professional point of view only bud graft technique is being brought in use .
Plants prepared by this procedure become worth planting very soon .
For buding ` s success 65 to 80 percent humidity is necessary to be present in atmosphere .
Appropriate conditions time and buding procedure prove success .
When plants enter hibernation then it is the appropriate time for planting north east slope is the best for planting .
Plants can be planted from end of December to beginning of February .
Generally as soon as hibernation ends there is a requirement for nutrients at the time of budding .
Bio manure , which takes time in decomposing rotting coming to the state of availability in soil .
Due to this reason they should be used a little before .
Phosphorus and Potassium imbued fertilizer dissolve late hence it is beneficial to use them in the depths near roots .
Fertilizers equipped with nitrogen should be used on the upper layer of soil only .
Half amount of nitrogen should be given before flowering and the rest in the second week of April .
For successful cultivation of plum cleaning , weeding and maintainance of Thavals in time is very important .
Plantations in which gardening activities take place from time to time .
In them yield is also good .
In these fruit tress there is special importance of harvesting-pruning .
Shape of trees without harvesting-pruning is not formed correctly .
During hibernation when leaves from the tree fall , this time is best suited for harvesting-pruning .
The time from November-January is appropriate for pruning .
If the fruit is to be plucked to eat or if it is to be sent to a nearby market then it should be plucked in ripe condition .
To send to markets far away fruits should be plucked carefully at the advent of green-yellow hue .
Through canning its fruit products can be sent to markets in far-flung areas .
Along with being tasty plum sauce can be prepared easily .
San Jose Scale Insect -LRB- San Jose scale -RRB- : Part of fruit tress infected with this insect begins to look like brown color .
Underneath these scalar cover minute insect hide , who keep sucking juice out of soft plant tissues .
Plants and branches completely infected with disease should be burnt after cutting .
Stem Borer insect : This insect harms by eating internal soft tissues after making holes in the trunk and branches of fruit tree and by making tunnels in them , due to which fruit tree and its branches begin to dry up .
Excreta -LRB- sawdust -RRB- of brown color is seen all around the tree infested with this insect in the form of round balls .
Leaf curling insect : This insect after sucking juice from leaves of fruit trees curl them .
The nourishment of this insect is visible on fruit trees from November to last week of May .
On flapping the leaves insects and its eggs are visible from its inside .
Solar heat disease in fruit trees : due to outbreak of this disease the barks of trunk and fat branches begin to tear and long cracks develop in the wood below the bark .
This disease happens due to excess cold in winters and excess solar heat in summers .
Diseased branches begin to dry up .
Generally due to this disease more damage is on the southern parts of the trunk .
Vegetable is an inseparable part of human food chain .
Rich - poor people all make its use in various forms .
They are also named as protective food and functional food because of being full of vitamins , mineral salts and fiber .
many kinds of human disorders are flourishing because of today ` s fast globalisation and people ` s changing lifestyle due to it .
Under such circumstances relevance of consuming vegetables has increased .
As a result number of vegetarians is growing rapidly .
According to surveys loss of vegetables is approximately 30 percent of gross production .
In the past years a big reshuffle has taken place in production , management and marketing of vegetables .
This change can be seen in the form of new areas of production , productin techniques and marketing retail marketing -RRB- .
In all the changes retailing has effected vegetable production and post-harvest management the most .
In this era of retailing importance of management of vegetables post-harvest has increased more .
this is why nowadays trend of producer-consumer loyalty-perception is increasing .
Vegetables ` post-harvest physical and quality related loss can be reduced with better management .
The state of vegetables during plucking has a direct relation with their post-harvest quality .
This is why harvesting should not be done very early or very late .
This is why harvest only during a set maturation situation only .
Product ` s quality can not be increased after harvesting .
cut vegetables with stalk with the help of scissors , they should not be plucked by pulling .
Always pluck in the morning because at that time after receiving coolness of night the internal temperature of vegetables become minimum , which is desirable .
Pluck vegetables keeping matured part in mind .
Pluck completely developed vegetables only .
Pluck in a way that there are minimum wounds or scratches in them .
The main purpose of sorting is to pick and separate torn rotten and asymmetrical leaves  fruits  roots  tubes .
By doing this the product is saved from being polluted apart from being effective and look attractive .
Curing of tapioca , sweet potato and arum can be done in some room or shady place as well .
The skin of these products become a little hard because of curing and in them during categorisation , packing , transportation and storage the chances of rotting of yield reduce .
Treatment of cucumber , ladyfinger , parwal , capsicum and leafy vegetables with natural wax has been found very beneficial .
To divide vegetables in many divisions according to their weight , shape , color and form is called categorisation .
Categorisation of vegetables is done manually -LRB- through hands -RRB- and with the aid of machines .
Categorisation of leafy vegetables peas , cabbage class crop and vegetables of white pumpkin family is done by hands .
Use of machines is quite successful in categorisation of tuber crops .
It is not necessary to wash all vegetables after plucking and digging .
For example by storing onion , garlic , potato and pumpkin after washing an opposite effect is laid on their storage duration .
Increment in storage duration has been found by washing leafy vegetables carrot , radish , tomato , aubergine , capsicum , bitter gourd , tinda -LRB- round gourd -RRB- and other vegetables of white pumpkin family .
The product should be made to dry after applying wax .
Usually paraffin or carnauba wax is put to use for the purpose of waxing .
Along with wax fungus and bacteria can also be treated .
Due to wax treatment rate of breathing and vapor emission is reduced .
Excessively thick and excessively thin layer of wax both kind of layers can be harmful for products .
Now even machines are being brought into use for wax treatment .
By pre-cooling product ` s breathing and vapor emission rate slows down and declining rate of pigments and vitamins reduces .
It should be remembered that super-cooled vegetables are kept in cold chain always .
On the basis of product ` s shape , type and condition various kinds of packing are brought into use .
At the time of plucking many type of things are used to keep fruits and vegetables .
Generally in India for packing jute bags paper card-boards wood boxes and cane baskets are used .
Apart from this with the use of baskets made of wood and cane an adverse effect is laid on deforestation and our environment is effected .
This is why more stress should be given on packing materials made of paper card-boards .
India has done unprecedented progress in the production of vegetables , but there is still more to be done in the post-harvest management .
Different horticultural crops are stored under different types of temperature and moisture .
A complete change can be seen in the farming-horticultural ecology in past years .
Reducing levels , deteriorating health of soil , fury of insect-diseases , declining of product quality , low-quality production , low life expectancy of trees etc are taking form of countless problems .
The reason is clear , degenerating balance between farming and husbandry .
Now again efforts are underway to reinstate the balance .
In this series organic farming has been marked as topmost option .
Those AADAN are used in organic farming untouched form the use of chemicals , with which the fertile nature of earth sustains no doubt there is no pollution in the environment and balance is maintained in arming ecology .
It is a consequence of this only that organic farming is getting popular worldwide .
At present organic farming is being done in more than 140 countries , among which Australia , Argentina and Brazil are main .
According to the numbers of 2007 the business of organic products has remained more than 46 million dollars in world market .
The market demand of these products is rising by 15-25 percent at an annual rate .
The need is to get benefited from the increasing demand of organic products in relative time .
In India also an initiative has been taken in this direction .
In National Horticulture Mission organic farming encouragement directed policy has been made .
Bio farming gets enough encouragement with this motive scheme named organic mission 2020 has been initiated .
Target has been established to replace India at the first place in total area and production under organic farming in the next 10 years .
It is clear that there is immense possibility of organic farming to develop in the form of future ambitious farming  horticulture technology .
In the district farming of orange is done in black cotton soil .
This in the lower layer is equipped with hard layer of Muram .
To keep orange fruitful presence of calcium in soil is beneficial .
5 P . P . S . amount of calcium in soil is desirable for fruition .
In this kind of soil balance between vegetable and fruit growth in orange is maintained .
Trees remain more fruitful .
Orange fruits are rich sources of nutritious elements especially calcium and potassium .
Mostly orange is used in fresh food .
With its fruits juice , R . T . M . , marmalade squash etc are also made .
Oil procured from skin is useful in production of cosmetic material , soap , perfume , aroma treatment and medicinal materials .
Fungus destroying and plant disease destroying nature has also been found in the oil .
Many nutritious elements are found in orange due to which it plays an important role in health preservation .
calcium found in abundant amount in fruits is an important factor of bone and tooth , which is very important for school kids .
Folic acid present in fruits is beneficial for development of brain .
The presence of magnesium in orange keeps blood pressure balanced .
Although orange is of acidic taste but actually its effect is base , which after increasing digestive juice flow is helpful in digestion .
Polyphenol found in fruits saves from virus generated infection .
Orange is called Narangi in Hindi .
Which means that due to fragrant fruits orange is known as Narangi .
Narangi flowers are a component of perfume generator .
Its flowers which are state flower of Florida -LRB- United States of America -RRB- .
Petals of fruits are used in making rose water containing orange fragrance .
Orange flower water is used in sweets and bakery .
Skin of flowers is used in keeping snails away from trees .
Honeybees make honey from pollen grains of Narangi flowers , whose taste is unique .
Harauti zone situated in south-east part of Rajasthan holds a prominent place in orange production in the horticulture scenario .
When new growth comes in orange orchid in February , July and October then there is a violent attack of lemon butterfly on them .
In the intercropping orchids there is outbreak of tobacco caterpillar also along with lemon butterfly .
In supply of nutrients and prevention of diseases use of marine grass has been found beneficial .
Generally 6 irrigation is done of orchid fruitful due to horticulture .
Market price of organic orange is usually more than normal orange .
This is even more than twice the income gained from normal orange .
Quality of orange of organic farming is good .
During ripening this does not fall rather fast rather fast .
The color of the fruits is bright and fruits are more sweet .
On the increase of the duration of storage fruits do become loose , but do not rot .
Organically produced orange does not rot even in long distance transportation .
There is a huge demand of oranges produced in this way in the broad market begun by private companies in various cities .
The need is to provide a boost to organic product .
This will prove effective in sustaining and increasing interest of horticulturists towards horticulture .
Due to government ` s slackness on decision making on the front of the most important fertilisers for agriculture production the balance of subsidy received by companies has reached to 22,000 crores .
For the current financial year -LRB- 2012-13 -RRB- budget provision of fertiliser subsidy worth 65,000 crore rupees has been made .
To meet the needs of the country for a year their import is not required .
This is why government should stop subsidy on them for one year .
In the current financial year till 15 January 57.7 tonne DAP and 4 lakh tonne MOP were imported .
By government putting an end to subsidy of Rs . 14,000 per tonne it will save Rs . 8,7000 crore .
There we import approximately 80 lakh tonne urea annually .
Government should give subsidy only on 15 percent import of country ` s requirements .
Government is providing Rs .18,000 per tonne subsidy on imported urea .
By stopping subsidy on fifty lakh tonne it will save rupees 9,000 crore subsidy .
While on the home front government can increase Rupees 750 per tonne on the cost of Urea .
Alongside it can reduce Rupees 1,000 per tonne in concession -LRB- subsidy -RRB- on DAP and MOP .
Increase in urea price will not effect farmers because industry is ready to decrease cost of DAP by Rupees 1,000 and cost of Mop by Rupees 1,500 per tonne .
In agriculture there is special importance of climate and water management technology .
In our country success or failure of all millets depend on climate , especially on rain because in all the areas cultivating millets rain water is the main source of moisture .
Hence process of use of water received from rain is controller of production level of all of these grains .
It is necessary to have knowledge of rain water accumulation , conservation and utilisation ability , collected underground water and water absorption power of land etc .
Amalgamation of information is very important for successful farming of millets .
From the point of view of millets rain and temperature , are important parts of climate .
Rain hold maximum importance because more than 95 percent area of all millets remains dependent on rain for production of yield .
Mostly it is seen that approximately 0 percent rain happens by south-west monsoon .
Its distribution is extremely uneven as it must be known to you that around 4000 m.m rain in Khasi mountains whereas only 200 m.m rain takes place in western Rajasthan .
In western Rajasthan only 311.1 and in Saurashtra and Kuchh 482.6 m . m . average annual rain falls .
Pearl millet is major crop of both the areas .
For various parts of our country minimum rain duration related repeat time has been known .
An estimate has been calculated through this study that there is a possibility of famine in western Rajasthan after every two and a half years .
Similarly in Gujarat , eastern Rajasthan , Tamilnadu , Rayalsima and Tailangana there is famine every third year .
Amount of monsoon rain and distribution depends on total number and density of areas with less pressure which are called dhaskan -LRB- depression -RRB- and chakravati aandhi -LRB- cyclonic storm -RRB- .
From Bay of Bengal and Arabian Sea they move towards interior parts of the country and become a reason for rain .
In all regions cultivating millets of Khareef season rain happens due to these monsoon winds only .
In reality the problem is complicated in those parts where it rains less than 750 m.m and in maximum regions cultivating millets it rains upto 300 - 1125 m.m .
The total duration of rain is less in northern part and more in southern part which means in these parts long-term varieties can be sowed .
Perhaps due to long monsoon climate only finger millet is more popular in south instead of north .
If sowing is not done soon after first rain of monsoon then scarcity of water in delicate state of crop like budding stage or during the grain ` s milky state can be the reason for scarcity of produce and failure of crop .
Approximately from middle of June to middle of September usually rain happens more than evaporation therefore there can be a requirement of water drainage as well .
Alongside during this time crop can be grown without irrigation which means based on rains .
As you know that during this time in regions with dry farming in Delhi , Haryana , Punjab and Uttar Pradesh -LRB- western part -RRB- pearl millet or sorghum crop is sown .
On normalisation of rain good yield of crop can be obtained .
Problem of water drainage also becomes important on consumable water of rain being more than usage .
On heavy rains in more regions cultivating millets conservation of water and earth is important .
In such a state success of farming can be increased by acculmulation and conservation of excess water by various methods .
In some regions cultivating millets like Dindori division of Madhya Pradesh it rains approximately 1400 to 1600 m . m .
It is sometimes of more density as well therefore water fills up in farms due to which Kondo , little millet or other crops can be damaged .
Its solution is only adequate drain of water .
This problem can appear in parts with less rain temporarily .
For example in many parts of Delhi during rainy season rain water drainage becomes an issue and crop like sorghum also receives damage .
After sowing Jowar on receiving 25 m . m . rain germination of Jowar is extremely satisfactory .
On 250 m.m rain happening during growth period plant growth is normal .
On heavy raining of 75 to 100 mm pollen washes off or bearing ability of stigma reduces and obstacle appear in the activity of grain formation and produce becomes less .
On raining 25 to 50 mm during maturation of grain development of grain is good .
There is no effect of rain before sowing on yield but at the time of sowing its effect is definitely there .
By raining 3 - 4 days after sowing production reduced because germination did not take place .
Till flowering in germination that is during growth stage much increase took place in production in raining 75 - 225 mm .
Raining less than 75 mm or more than 225 mm has not been found useful from the point of view of grain ` s produce .
Falling of one 150 mm rain for crop sown for fodder or grain has been found extremely useful .
Heavy raining during flowering or maturation has been found dangerous .
Because of this pearl fell off and produce reduced .
Apart form rain , soil moisture temperature also has an important place in production of crop .
There are maximum and minimum limits to it beyond them growth either stops or remains next to nil .
On temperature being high plant dries up temperature is optimum between both limits on which maximum growth of plant takes place .
These three types of temperature are called as cardinal limits calculative limits .
For all crops of summer in which millets are also included minimum 15-18 centigrade and maximum 44-450 centigrade temperature has been found by the way for every stage of the plant requirement of minimum , optimum and maximum temperature is different .
For every crop to mature requirement of heat units is different .
By the way it has been seen that in comparison to other food grains effect of temperature on sorghum is somewhat less even then in the stage when ears are about to come bad effect on product is there on temperature being more than 380 centigrade , normal optimum temperature for pearl millet , finger millet and other millets is between 25-320 centigrade .
Apart form atmosphere ` s temperature leaf and earth ` s temperature are also important .
In all the regions cultivating millets temperature of atmosphere is usually high and on scarcity of water in earth much difference comes between temperature of leaf and atmosphere .
But in these crops there is power to tolerate quite high temperature .
On extreme scarcity of water in earth leaves of sorghum and pearl millets take up a round turn on the most hot part of the day which is a natural process to bear adverse situations of this kind .
Usually leaves of these grain plants keep an amazing power of tolerating more heat burden in comparison to other crops .
There is deep effect of temperature of earth on activity of seed roots , growth period and seriousness of diseases .
In the Kharif season due to excess moistness rate of transpiration by millets is usually low .
The day there are clouds in such a situation also its rate remains low .
As a result in a situation of more water considerable progress is there in underground water usage ability of these grains .
Apart form water use deep effect of moisture is laid on outbreak of diseases and insects like seriousness of green leaf downy mildew named disease in pearl millet depends on depth of attack , moisture and temperature of atmosphere .
On moisture more that 80 percent in situation of ideal temperature the primary and secondary infection of this disease assumes a serious form .
In this way on excessive moisture chempa disease can also become a serious problem .
On appropriate percentage amount of moisture , outbreak of shoot fly and insects called midge in Sorghum forms a serious problem .
Solar radiation , is the only source of energy and efforts for making its maximum use via plants in agricultural activities are being made .
In excessive active photosynthesis more than 3 percent radiation is not used .
It has been seen that activity of photosynthesis till light density of 2500 foot candle goes on rising on a direct level .
In country ` s all regions growing millets abundant amount of sun light is received .
Therefore it is possible to increase yield by making its maximum use .
In sorghum , pearl millets , finger millets and other millets structure of leaves and their number are different .
There are plenty possibilities of increasing light use ability in millets .
such a kind or hybrid species should be developed through reproduction methods whose upper leaves almost standing and lower leaves are lied down .
In this way by keeping density of plants , distance of lanes or area and time of sowing in the right situation desirable progress can be made in light use ability .
There is profound relation with direction of lanes also .
It is possible to increase the production level of both the crops cultivated keeping these points mind in the methods of inter cropping .
Red : Its ray-length is 0.72-0 .69 microns .
Green pigment of leaves -LRB- chlorophyll -RRB- absorbs it and is extremely helpful in photosynthesis .
Green and yellow : Is an obstacle in photosynthesis and creative activities .
Ultraviolet : Height of plants less and thickness of leaves become more .
Prolonged day plants are those who flower only when the day is longer than 14 days .
Short day plants are those which flower on days less than 10 hours .
In medium day plants the activity of flowering takes place in 12-14 hours long days .
On neutral-day plants effect of day length is not there on its flowering activity .
On the basis of this categorisation all millets can be called short-day plants .
Amount of dew is more in September and October that is during maturation time of Pearl millets and sorghum .
Otherwise there is possibility of dew being less helpful in fulfilling total water requirement of the plant because between possible accumulation and evaporation ratio of approximately 1:4 is there and alongside these plants need maximum requirement of moist water during noon and by then all dew is over .
Breeze has been found helpful in the activity of photosynthesis because this is helpful in supplying necessary amount of carbon diaoxide .
This can be more helpful in pearl milets and sorghum because their leaf canopy is much more than sorghum .
Because of which there is possibility of a hindrance in give and take of gases .
Apart form this benefit damage is also caused due to air like if along with rain winds also blow after ears have appeared in sorghum and pearl millets then there is a fear of them falling off due to which shortage comes in produce .
If winds blow -LRB- specially from eastern direction -RRB- when there is scarcity of moisture in earth then rapid decrease of moisture takes place form the plant and bed of earth and an adverse effect is laid on the yield .
Temperature of leaves has been found out to be more than temperature of atmosphere during day time and less during night .
By passing through the plant a difference occurs in density and quality of light .
Here the matter worth paying attention is that connection of disease of green leaf and chaimpa in pearl millets should be made with temperature found in micro-climate part and not with atmospheric temperature .
Actually it will be appropriate that optimum temperature or moisture for all diseases of millets or growth of insects should be measured with micro atmosphere unit only .
Like plant land has its own micro climate .
Only some part of radiation received from sun is only received till the base of earth .
Albedo in pearl millet and finger millet is more as compared to Sorghum .
In this way albedo in the land with dark shade base is less as compared to land with light shade base .
That is albedo is less in southern parts of countries cultivating these grains and more in northern parts .
Maximum area of millets remain dependent on rains for farming .
Only 4.2 and 3.3 percent are of sorghum and pearl millet are irrigated respectively .
Means of irrigation are available in Madua ` s 18.2 percent meaning maximum area .
Therefore in all these areas to completely arrange water is very important from the point of view of successful farming and production stabilization .
Main parts of water conservation are evaporation , transpiration and underground flow .
By controlling them amount of water conservation can be increased to a large extent .
There is equal distribution of rain falling on land by making land base plain and because of being filled in land for a long time its appropriate conservation is possible .
Usually the activity of flattening is done through borax but with this surface is not evenly flattened this is why it is important that modern instruments of innovative kind should be used .
Huge bulldozers and other heavy machines are used for this work .
Its use is out of financial power of farmers cultivating millets .
Earthen Bunding or the act of ridging has been found very helpful in water conservation .
Terrace construction : This method is adopted in areas with more slope otherwise along with water depletion the fear of land erosion is also there .
Fortunately in most parts cultivating millets great incline is not found .
They are also made based on contour lines and in parts with dry farming terraces absorbing water are constructed .
In parts cultivating millet where average amount of annual rain is between 750 - 1125 mm , in those parts two crops can be yielded in a year by adopting this procedure .
For example : Mustard-Sorghum and Pigeon pea-Gram fallow crop rotation has been succesfully adopted by making terrace farms in Etawah district of Uttar Pradesh .
Before this in this region only one crop was cultivated in three-four years .
Contour furrowing : This process is usually adopted in lands producing cotton because the speed of inter-pulsation in this land is slow .
By adopting this method water can be blocked in farm for a longer time due to which water storage duration increases and earth can absorb water in more amount .
This method has been found best for land with 1-3 percent incline .
Rain water gets collected in these furrows and water can not be let out due to flowing action .
In this way land erosion can also be checked .
Following this method in Narmada valley area , southern land mass and in Malwa has been found useful .
The main purpose of tilling activity is destruction of weeds and to make the upper layer friable .
This is an extremely old agricultural practice .
In areas cultivating millet tilling is done to prepare beds .
It is a point to be kept in mind that if the upper layer of land has become highly friable the on raining the possibility of erosion of this land will increase , along with this will clog tiny cavity pods on raining and due to this water flow will also increase .
In this way accumulated amount in land or amount of rain water to be conserved will also reduce .
Therefore a farm should not be tilled in excess .
In our country native plough has been used continuously .
There is more possibility of annual depreciation in regions with light soil of Rajasthan , Gujarat and Maharashtra .
With deep tilling of land which is called subsoil deep till , hard layer can be made useful .
Usually tilling has been found best from the point of view of depth of land entry .
In this way it should be hoped that on tilling deeply growth of roots will increase as a result of which improvement in the growth of shoots is mandatory .
They were measured on the basis of weight of dry roots and shoots .
Improvement came in the weight of aridity and shoots of all the three millets with deep tilling .
Subsoiling has generally been found better through ford tillage .
The reason for going till excessive depth of roots was that on deep tilling land got crumbly till excessive depth which means roots had to face less obstacles .
Like humans roots also look for ways with minimum blockades .
Lid : Its purpose is to collect and conserve that moisture of earth which depletes by evaporation from the upper layer of land .
This method has a more importance in regions growing millet .
Because in these regions it is possible to increase produce of these grains with utilisation of rain water .
Land lay-out : Water harvesting and conservation is possible through land layout as well .
By making drains in farms ran water can be blocked in drains and if if amount of rain is 750 mm or more annually then two crops can be gained by adopting this method .
With this method yielding a second crop will be possible only in that situation if its sowing is done in October only and the total water requirement o crop being cultivated is less .
This much is for sure that if the arrangement of water blockage and collecting is done then yeild of millet planting can be increased to a large extent .
The meaning of water harvesting is to collect and conserve water in such a part of land which has been treated from the perspective of water inflow .
Such a method is usually called water harvesting because its water catchment area is big and water is collected in big ponds or water bodies .
Water harvesting methods in the form of small watersheds will have to be adopted in regions cultivating millet .
Generally in this method use of water is done for crop of that very season or stored in storage tank made on the basis of water requirement and estimated amount to be received on receiving enough amount of rain .
On requirement this water can be utilised for crop with less water in that very season or in another season .
It has been found abroad that it is possible to utilise land moisture by vapor harvesting as well .
In this way we come to know that for successful farming of sorghum there should be no water scarcity during seeding stage , before fruition or mature stage and during fruition .
This is usually sown in un-irrigated parts .
In millets also use of irrigation is hardly used because in these parts irrigation facilities are not there .
Millets is not useful from the point of view of finance on the basis of number of irrigation and amount .
Yes , If it is grown for seed or for hybrid seed then it can be beneficial .
Usually the fruition stage of pearl millets has been considered critical .
Millets are grown in region with dryland agriculture therefore the only source of water fulfillment is rain .
Usually no change can be brought in the amount of evaporation and transpiration because it is primarily based on climate .
In this way through crop and land management only efforts should be made to increase the water utilisation ability of these grains .
In the act of crop management the choice of crops , sowing the correct time , correct density of plants , use of manure in appropriate amount and at appropriate time , crop cycle and weed control are included .
In land management acts of fertility of land and underground water harvesting are special .
The meaning of cropping pattern the inter change of crops in the same piece of land or field and on the naming of cropping pattern on the basis of some crop circle ` s so and so division and area .
Therefore crop circle and cropping pattern are almost synonymous .
In agricultural history crop circle is an ancient intercropping technique whose many benefits have been told .
Such crops are included in crop sequence whose depth of roots and development cycle varies so that they use nutrients and water from land form different depths .
During their planning it is taken care that one crop , which is included in the pattern , has no adverse effect on the other crop .
There was a time in agricultural area that cropping pattern was considered extremely important because in them lentil cops were included to stabilise or improve the fertililty power of land .
Lentil crops possess the ability to collect nitrogen from the environment and this nitrogen is helpful in increasing the fertility of land .
Use of lentil crop along with millets is being done as part of intercrop or crop circle .
by including the fodder lentil crop like this less amount of nutrients are used from the land .
Amount of nitrogen and organic matter increases in the land .
There is a good control over weeds when weeding is done along with fodder harvest because they are cut even before they blossom .
In all the regions growing millets where average amount of rain is 400 m . m . or more than this , practical use of these results is possible .
In Rabi season in the month of October any crop that can utilise water as per its ability can be sowed .
It will be beneficial to chose this crop from mustard , gram or sorghum .
In the present time in India store of around 260 million tonne rock phosphate is available .
Of these quality of most of phosphate is of low grade .
Of which less than 20 percent P205 -LRB- phosphate -RRB- is ofund , which is not beneficial for the production of commercial phosphate holding manure .
But phosphorous present in rock phosphate can be used in agriculture in the from of phosphorous source by dissolving it through its reformation .
Making rock phosphate rich compost is an economic and easy method .
India in this matter is fortunate that here are maximum resources of muscovite mica .
Muscovite mica is a potassium rich mineral .
Potash upto 9-10 percent is found in it .
Waste mica is obtained during mining and processing of raw mica and this mica is left near the mines .
Four different samples of waste mica were collected from Koderma district and analysis of potassium was done in them .
There was difference found in mica on one batch from the mica of another batch .
A possibility of making potassium present in waste mice due to composting into soluble through organic activities .
There are great deposits of gypsum and pyrite minerals in India .
In soil they can be used directly in the form of source of calcium and sulphur and iron and sulphur respectively .
Organic elements rich with nutritious elements - these are good ingredients to make mineral compost .
While using rock phosphate , mineral Gypsum and waste Gypsum enrich compost can be prepared through compost-bed method .
The length of trench should be determined on the basis of the availability of organically disintegrated substances .
Filling of trench or vermi-bed is done layr by layer -LRB- 5-6 layers -RRB- .
Remains of yield is laid on the surface of stack or vermi-bed .
Around 15-20 c . m . thick layer .
After this rock phosphate , waste mica and gypsum layer are laid .
A solution is made by filling animal waste -LRB- 150 kg -RRB- in a plastic bucket and mixing it with water -LRB- 150 litre -RRB- .
This solution is sprinkled on the layer of rock phosphate , waste mica and gypsum .
Keep applying crop remains , minerals and layer of animal dung till the time complete disintegratable matter has not been used .
During complete composting method 60 percent of water absorbing ability is maintained .
For protection from rain water compost is covered with a polysheet .
Compost is cooked for four months and after that organic element-mineral becomes ready for compost use .
In organic element-mineral compost prepared through the above mentioned procedure 1 percent total nitrogen , 1 percent phosphorous , 2.1 percent total potassium and 1.7 percent sulphur is there .
On the soil lacking in nitrogen , phosphorous and sulphur of Geelakhedi , Rajgadh -LRB- Madhya Pradesh -RRB- village three treatments were used in the crop of soya bean .
Because only minerals available naturally are used in making organic element-mineral compost rich , hence it can play an important role in carbonic farming .
Under organic farming only cow dung manure can not suffice phosphorus potassium and sulphur in sufficient amount of leguminous crops , but with the use of bio matter-mineral rich compost fulfillment of phosphorous , potash and sulphur can be done in huge amounts along with nitrogen .
Excess quantity of local low quality rock phosphate and waste mica can be used in agriculture in the form of source of phosphorous and potassium .
In this way foreign currency spent on the import of expensive phosphorous -LRB- DAP -RRB- and Potash -LRB- MOP -RRB- fertilisers can be saved .
The technique of making jaggery and sugar out of sugercane was born in India first .
To give energy and taste jaggery is used on primary basis in Indian cuisine .
Soon after harvesting one should begin extracting juice out of sugarcane .
Through sugarcane kept for a long time high quality juice is not received .
65-85 percent Sucrose , 10-15 percent invert sugar and 2.5 percent ash is found in pure jaggery .
Jaggery production technique is an easy and able to be established in low investment cottage industry .
Jaggery primarily is made in Maharashtra , Uttar Pradesh , Gujarat and Bihar states in abundance .
Production of sugarcane in Madhya Pradesh is 4,089 kg and is grown in 62,000 hectare area .
Out of total production of sugarcane 15-20 percent is used in making jaggery .
Jaggery is used in Indian cuisine , especially in south Indian and Gujarati dishes like lentils , saambhar , rassam etc .
From nutritional and medicinal point of view jaggery is many times better than sugar .
According to Ayurveda science with the use of jaggery weakness , breathlessness , half-consciousness , fatigue , nasha pathri , gonorrhea , old and acute fever , raktapitta etc diseases are cured .
In the production of Unani and Ayurvedic medicines jaggery is used instead of sugar .
Ginger juice is mixed and given along with jaggery to cure cough , cold and throat rashes .
Weakness and fatigue is cured by drinking water after eating a lump of jaggery .
To curb psychological weakness , breathing diseases , digestion related problems and skin diseases one should make one drink shorbet by mixing jaggery along with Indian gooseberry juice .
Acquisition of jaggery from sugarcane is from 18 to 20 percent , which is approximately double than sugar .
In jaggery medicinal and healthy qualities are found in abundance .
Various important amino acid , mineral salts and vitamins are acquired through it .
Also high calcium is found for the strength of bones .
Due to extra amount of iron in it there is medicinal quality for prevention against anemia .
By using it in daily diet required dose of magnesium and potassium is also fulfilled .
Jaggery is helpful in control of blood pressure and heart beat , implementation of muscle network also .
This is important to be used in every person ` s daily diet , because in it more nutritious and medicinal qualities are present which are as follows .
In jaggery necessary minerals salts and vitamins are present for body to work regularly .
It contains potassium and sodium which keeps the ` blood pressure ` of body controlled .
It is the best source of iron and this increases level of hemoglobin in body .
For this reason , jaggery is beneficial for anemic people .
Availability of enough amount of calcium , phosphorous and zinc is beneficial for the body .
Jaggery is helpful in ` blood purification ` .
it works as a filter for body .
Protects the body from the ill-effects resulting from dust and smoke .
Jaggery , keeps the body healthy by keeping liver activities under control .
Jaggery is also very useful in diseases like that of gout , air and bile .
There is more fear of jaggery purified by chemicals soaking moisture and becoming sticky and watery during rains .
This lack is next to negligible in vegetational purified jaggery .
In the first stage after sugarcane ` s harvesting its crushing is done by ox-driven or power-driven oil-mill .
Acquisition of sucrose by juice extraction through traditional method is relatively less , but because of excessive mineral elements being there jaggery made form this juice is more healthy and nutritious .
After taking out juice impurities are separated by sieving it through sieve .
Sugarcane juice is deep green color and its acidity is from 5 to 5.4 P . H . .
To prepare jaggery juice is boiled in huge skillets .
Broad and shallow utensils are appropriate for boiling .
Juice is cooked by boiling it slowly at low temperature .
To acquire good color and jaggery dirty part from juice should be taken out while boiling juice .
By putting floating impurities in vegetable purifier it is important to continously clean with jhara .
On treating by lime water and heat impurities of the bottom settle down and acidity can also be balanced .
On reaching temperature of 115 - 170 C transformation of juice becomes to colloid state via semi-liquid state .
To get special colourless jaggery the juice is purified through sodium hydro sulphide or carbon extracted from rice husk .
On threads formation in the juice it is cooled down by filling it in wooden moulds or earthern wheels .
On cooling down jaggery is put into moulds to give sha .
For transportation jaggery is wrapped in paper cardboard or cloth bags , so that there is no discomfort during transportation .
Jhil is a member of leguminosae family whose botanical name is Cullen Plicata .
Use of various parts of Jhil like root , leaf , fruit and seed are done in medicines .
This plant has been placed in rare category by the Botanical Survey of India , Jodhpur .
In the current survey it has been found in Badmer -LRB- Bothiya Jageer and Haran Village -RRB- and Bikaner -LRB- Sagar -RRB- of Rajasthan .
Jhil is one fragrant plant .
Whose leaves are tri-plumed and in the flower dense hair are found on its outer section .
Leguminosae are the biggest group of plants on earth .
In which 500 dynasties and more than 12,000 species are included .
In them shoots , shrub and trees are included .
This plant is found in Africa , Algeria , Egypt , Ethiopia , Lybia , Morocco , Somalia , Sudan and western Sahara .
In India it is found primarily in states like Delhi , Gujarat , Haryana , Maharashtra , Punjab and Rajasthan .
They are found near clean water bodies like - nadi , pond , khadin .
Presently , its numbers are dwindling continuously .
That is why conservation of this plant is extremely important .
Diveristy of vegetation in desert is reducing as compared to vegetation in the entire nation .
Due tot his reason 63 plant varieties are on the verge of extinction .
Out of 33 percent local species of India 3 percent species -LRB- 44 -RRB- are found in this area .
Deforestation is taking place because of continuous growth in human needs like - wood for fuel , use of seeds for oil , acquiring adhesive , etc due to which some species are on the verge of extinction .
This plant is found only near Khadin and clean water reservoirs in Rajasthan and seeds are only accumulated through Badmer only .
As soon as the seed has germinated it should be kept in partial shade and should be watered regularly .
But this thing should be kept in mind that due to water collection quagmire like situation should not be born .
Its roots are very soft because of which care should be taken while transferring .
Peacocks , squirrels etc creatures harm this plant .
Now out of 60 transferred plants only total 36 plants are left alive .
In future they have been conserved for seed collection .
Initially number of leaves in them increase gradually in it and 3 months later excessive growth in their number takes place .
In this way this plant is has been successfully conserved in Desert Botanic Garden , CAZRI , Jodhpur and twice seeds also have been collected from it .
By preparing new plants from these seeds their germplasm collection has been done in botanic garden .
In the last week of August new leaves emerge in Jhil plant and some old leaves are are also there which shed after some time .
Soon after shedding of the old leaves creation of bud begins .
Primarily construction of flowers take place between February to March .
At this time temperature low and rain is less .
Increasing temperature and long day increases in the number of flowers and by the end of summers seeds are developed .
In this way at the time of rains seeds get ready for germination .
Along with this only new plants should be protected from birds , small animals and sunlight .
Kashmir is believed to be ` Earth ` s Paradise ` due to its attractive beauty .
Kashmir is surrounded by three mountain ranges Karakoram , Janskaaar and peerpanjal of Himachal .
Snow capped mountains , flowing rivers , calm lakes , grand gardens , flowers laden plains etc are specialties of the landscape of Jammu-Kashmir .
Due to its beauty Kashmir is also called as ` Switzerland of East ` .
Jammu and Kashmir state is abundant with natural riches like soil , water and variation in topography and bio diversity .
80 percent population in Jammu and Kashmir remain dependent on agriculture .
Due to diverse climate and inexpensive labor there are many possibilities of flower production in Jammu and Kashmir .
Kashmir valley is abundant with indigenous and foreign ornamental plants and flowers .
Every year export of approximately two crore rupees takes place from the state .
There is a historical garden tradition in Kashmir state .
There are many gardens in the state form the Mughal era , in which Nishat garden , Shalimar garden , Chashmashahi garden and Harman garden are main .
Initially many ornamental plants and flowers were brought to Jammu and Kashmir by the British .
Now by Plant Introduction Division of Flower Production Directorate , import of Lilium , Gladiolus and Tulip is done regularly .
When weather is adverse to flower production in northern India .
At that time in Kashmir valley weather is appropriate for flower production and cut flower are sent to Delhi in May - October , due to which more profit is gained because of off season .
For flower farming State flower science division provide technical assistance , training and input , financial assistance in the form of subsidy for purchasing .
CIDCO , APEDA and NABARD also provide financial help to provide impetus to flower farming .
To sell cut flower an agreement is in place of the state with European and Gulf countries .
Where demand of Lily , Tata rose cut flower is very much .
in the year 2008 Tulip garden was established by flower science department in Siraj garden , Srinagar which is situated in foothills of Jabravan hills .
This is the only tulip garden of the nation .
9 lakh Tulip were imported by the department form Holland .
In this garden 1.2 million Tulip of 59 kinds are available in different colors .
Tulip garden is the main attraction of tourists .
Based on the technique of Holland garden of seasonal flowers was established in the state in 2008 bhaur -LRB- blore camp -RRB- , Jammu .
Flower beds decorated like rainbow are the main characteristic of this garden .
In this garden there is a collection of seasonal flowers of more than 20 varities .
There are many grass fields and gardens in the state like - Nishat Garden , Shalimar Garden , Chashmashahi Garden , Polo Ground .
Cultivation of Gladiolas is very popular in Jammu and Kashmir .
Its farming is mainly done in Jammu , Srinagar , Badgam , Rajouri , Punchh , Kood , Chenoni and Leh areas .
In the state its farming is done at that time , when weather in northern India is adverse .
Due to this reason more economic gain is acquired through off season production .
For farming of gladiolus PH average should be between 5.5-6 .5 and temperature 18-270 c of sandy , clay soil .
Its main kinds are Salvia , Rose supreme , Nova lux , White friendship , White prosperity , Kingfisher , American beauty and Melody are main .
Every year in Jammu and Kashmir production of one lakh cut flower is done .
Carnation - This is an important cut flower .
There are immense possibilities of its farming in Jammu and Kashmir .
Lilium - This is a beautiful cut flower of ornamental root category , which is found in various colors , size and shapes .
Farming of Lilium is done in Punch and Rajouri in summers , Panchari and Shudhmahadev , Jammu and Srinagar , Pulvama and Badgam districts in winters .
Gerbera is a commercial cut flower with a long stalk .
Its farming is gradually becoming popular in Jammu and Kashmir .
This is primarily grown in green house .
Its main kinds - Winter queen , Salavdor , Don leo , Scope , Carambola , Dune , Rosalyn , Sunway and Pink elegance .
Its amplification is done through division .
Plant is sown at a distance of 30x30 cm .
Crown should be 2 cm above land .
It is a very beneficial crop .
Marigold : This can be easily grown in various climate and season .
Its farming is done in Jammu and Kashmir since quite some time .
Generally its two species African marigold and French Marigold are cultivated .
Its main types are - pusa narangi marigold , pusa baasandi marigold , climax , tellow supreme , golden edge , happiness , apollo and cupid .
Its plant is prepared from seeds .
Its production in the state is 700 quintal , whereas its demand is more than 1500 quintal .
In Jammu-Kashmir marigold flowers are exported in October-November and imported in July-August .
Rose : Its has an important place in cut flower production .
Its amplification is done through T-budding .
Its main kinds are First Red , Escape , Grand Gala , Confetti , Arjun , Raktgandha and Sindoor .
Production of cut flower is double in green house as compared to open sky .
In the state demand of rose cut flower is way more than production .
Tulip : This is an important flower , for which there is a huge demand in world market .
Its cultivation in state is done Kashmir valley .
Flowers begin to bloom in February - March .
For continuous flower production bulbs should be sown at 15 days ` interval .
In Jammu and Kashmir state flower farming is passing through initial phase .
State ` s climate is appropriate for flower farming .
There are immense possibilities of protected cultivation in the state .
Various climatic regions are situated at various heights in the state , due to which production of flowers can be done in the state throughout the year .
Specially at that time when weather is adverse for flower farming in the rest of India .
Labor is available easily and at inexpensive rates in the state , which is very important for flower farming .
There is a direct connection of the state with Delhi and other world markets , due to which market is easily available for selling flowers .
In India 7,500 medicinal plants are used commercially .
Use of Guggul in the form of medicinal plant is being done since many eras .
In Ayurveda Guggul has been described as 5 kinds -LRB- Mahipaksh , Mahaneel , Kumud , Padma , Kanak -RRB- .
Of these five kinds of Guggul kanak Guggul is used maximum in medicinal form .
Due to its excessive and uncontrolled exploitation in India today it is generally counted among extinct variety .
seepage of resin takes place from the main trunk and other branches of Guggul plant , which is known as Guggul .
In the world its 312 species are found , of which 5 are found in Indua -LRB- co . weightii , co . stockesiena , co . berriee , co . egalocha and co . Mar .
This is perennial , multi-branched and slow growing bush of Burseraceae family .
June end onward new leaves of violet color effloresce on it , which turn into green color after one month .
Flowers of guggul are small , of light pink or red color .
Guggul ` s fruit is a red colored stone-fruit which is as fleshy as a small berry .
Its seeds are small , reddish brown and smooth .
The seed in them is manufactured twice a year .
This plant is primarily found at hilly areas .
Its growth is relatively more in conserved places than non-conserved places and seed and resin is also more in them .
Oleo-gum-resin is found in it .
Plants of commiphora species are usually found more in tropical zone and temperate areas .
Commiphora is found in natural form in Rajasthan , Gujarat , Madhya Pradesh , Tamil Nadu , Karnataka of India .
Africa and Asia are its centres of origin .
Around 38 names of this plant are famous in various langugaes which are as following : Guggal , Guggul , Guggulu , Mukul , Bhavbhishta , Bhutahara , Devdhupa , Devashta , Dhoorta , Divya etc .
Guggul gum is a mixture of oleo-gm-resin , resin and volatile oils .
In Rajasthan resin extraction from guggul plant is done from April to June .
8 to 10 year old Guggul trees are most suitable for utilisation .
Traditional method or solvent extraction method is used for this .
8-9 years later guggul ` s adhesive can be taken out .
Use of Guggul is done in the treatment of various diseases .
Indian medical and research institute , Lucknow has developed Guggul Lipid in 1986 .
Use of Plants of Commiphora species is done in the form of cosmetics , which provides us with shining and spotless skin .
It is also used in the manufacturing of inert medicine .
Also due to presence of termite in land there is a constant decrease in its number .
This plant is used for fuel fulfillment by villagers .
Guggul is a plant mostly found in a rocky and mountainous area .
On such places erosion of soil is found more , as a result of which it becomes a reason for its extinction after making it unstable .
Its plants are also prepared through graft .
For grafting one should mix fertiliser in soil properly .
For this the weather of July - August is the best .
Within 10-15 days of planting it new sprouting begin and good plants are ready in 10-12 months .
While transferring no harm should be done to roots of the plant .
For good growth of plants very small branches in side should be pruned and water should be given in time but giving it less water is more useful .
Plant prepared through seed and grafting is transferred in a field during monsoon .
Black pepper -LRB- Piper nigrum -RRB- -LRB- Family : Piperaceae -RRB- is also known as ` king of spices ` or ` black gold ` .
It is primarily used in the form of spices and medicine .
In the world India is the major country which is a producer , consumer and importer of black pepper .
Since a few years production of black pepper has become limited around 50,000 tonne .
As such there are many reasons for a decrease in production , but out of these birth of many problems of diseases due to not adopting appropriate prevention strategy is the one .
Disease born out of nematode is also a major problem among these diseases .
Nematodes are very micro-sized , cylindrical , colourless and thread-like .
Usually they can not be seen with naked eyes .
Special kind of microscope is required to see them .
They cause harm to plant roots both ways from inside and outside .
This nematode produce problems of mild decay and root-knot diseases .
Mild Decay disease - this disease occurs due to collective or isolate infection of pathogens like R . Similis , M . Incognate and phytophthora .
R. Similis is a migratory endoparasite .
They take nutrition by moving from one place to the other after entering into roots of plants and M . incognita is an integral endoparasite , which leads its life by entering in roots from one place and taking nutrition from that very place .
Mild decay disease is born due to pathogen causing harm to feeder roots of plant .
In its main symptoms small and irregular black colored speckles appear in the roots of new plants , which meet with each other later on .
Due to this reason rotting in roots take place .
The outbreak of R . Similis is more from September to November and less from April to June .
There is an effect of rain , humidity , P-H mean and temperature also on their number .
Root-knot disease - This disease happens mainly due to root-knot nematode , meloidogyne spp .
This nematode cause 15-50 percent harm to the crop .
Among main symptoms in disease struck plants yellowness in leaves , withering , delay in fruit manufacture , stunted growth of plant etc can be seen .
This nematode completes many generations in one crop only .
This nematode completes its life cycle in 25-30 days .
Knots infected by nematode can not be separated from roots .
Outbreak of these nematode is more in December and less in April .
The problem of nematode can be resolved by the following control methods .
Outbreak of nematode is more in nursery .
species pournami developed by Indian Institute of Spices research , Calicut is a resistor of root-knot nematode .
Apart form this several races of black pepper have also been marked , which are nematode resistor .
Excessive infected plant whose revival possibility is not there should be destroyed after being uprooted .
Use of sowing material free from nematodes , smoked and sterilised potting mixture should be done for sowing .
Scarcity of edible products and fodder is happening due to incessant growth taking place in human and animal population .
This is why in dense farming scarcity of fodder and food can be fulfilled by amla based horticultural pasture method .
Amla is an important fruit tree of Euphorbiaceae family .
It can be grown in dry and semi dry areas .
It can easily be sown in less fertile and alkaline land whose P-H mean is 7.8 .
In the initial stage of Amla foder grass like anjan , dhaman , sevan etc can be grown in inter-cropping procedure .
Its average production 15-20 tonne can be acquired .
Mung , moth bean , chaula , gvar , groundnut etc crops in lentil crops of short duration can be sown in the form of bonus crops , with which excess production is gained of fodder and grain .
On the other hand cereals for humans and fodder for animals are obtained from horticulture pasture method .
Amla based grassland system can be grown successfully on problematic land .
Apart from this less fertile land can be made productive , due to which excess financial gain are acquired .
fruit begins to appear in amla plant four years after sowing .
In grassland system it is important to chose the type of Amla tree and inter-crop .
The choice of fruit tree amla depends on climate , soil type , water clogging and availability of irrigation means .
In the fourth year in grassland system fruits begin to come and in the years after this there is continuous growth in fruit production .
From amla plants maximum 6.78 tonne per hectare fruit production is done .
Anjan grass , Dhaaman grass , Deenanath grass can be sown in June-July .
Fertilisers and manures should be used according to the land type so that rich kind of production is gained more .
Perennial grass is more drought insulating .
This is why they can be grown in dry state after planting them in rainy season .
According to age indigenous and chemical fertiliser should be used in Amla trees .
Along with the age of plant amount of indigenous and chemical fertilisers should also be increased as shown in the table .
By transplanting papaya between two plants of Amla land utilisation and extra income are gained .
In this way from horticultural forestry system excessive production of fodder , fuel and fruits can be done .
With amla based grassland system nutrient circle can be maintained regularly .
Give and take of nutrients take place in plants from land and from plants to land .
Apart from this , from farms due to water flow and harsh winds crores of tonnes of fertile soil is destroyed after being washed away or blown away .
By saving this fertility of land can be increased .
Apart from this in amla based grassland system fertility can be increased through synthesis of atmospheric nitrogen in soil through sown balor , amarnathus , maunth , guar and groundnuts .
More nutrients are found in land due to shedding of amla leaves .
Increase in the availability of all nutrients has been seen by sowing fodder crop on the upper layer of soil .
Alongside help is received in making a high PH mean land unresponsive , due to which there is growth in availability in most nutrients .
Because of amla trees grown in amla based grassland the hard layer of land breaks down , due to which rain water enters the lower layer and assistance is received in soil erosion .
Due to less erosion flow of nutrients can be regulated .
In amla based grassland system fruit production begins from the fourth year .
In the initial years fruit production is less but later on productivity increases gradually .
If leguminous crops are sown between amla crop then there is an favourable effect on fruit tree amla .
By growing leguminous and non-leguminous fodder crops in ratio of 2:1 in grasslands 13:51 and 3.34 tonne green and dry fodder respectively is received .
Like humans and animals even plants require nutritional elements for appropriate growth and development .
We recognize them as elementary nutrients .
These elements are hydrogen , oxygen , nitrogen , phosphorus , potassium , calcium , magnesium , sulphur , zinc , iron , manganese , copper , boron , molybdenum , chlorine and nickel .
Among these elementary nutrients plants obtain carbon , hydrogen and oxygen from air and water , but for supply of other nutrients we have to use manure and fertilisers .
Plants are in requirement of nitrogen , phosphorus and potassium in excess amount this is why they are called main nutrients .
Separate from them calcium , magnesium and sulphur are kept in supporting and secondary nutrients category .
This is why identifying deficiency of micro nutrients and their obliteration is extremely important .
It is an undisputed truth that in the decade of 60 soil was strong in the initial phase of green revolution .
Generally nitrogen was deficient and later on sign were found of phosphorus deficiency .
Due to increase in use of urea and D . A . P . exploitation of other nutrients has taken place and apart form nitrogen , phosphorus deficiency of zinc , sulphur and potassium has also been established .
Due to continuous growing of crops in intensive agriculture absorption of elementary nutrients from land is happening continuously whereas re-compensation of nutrients by fertilisers and manures in taking place in less and uncontrollable amount .
Because of which extensive deficiency of many micro nutrients has taken place .
Consequently crop produce is reduced .
Agricultural requirements especially fertlisers are also becoming expensive due to which pure income from agriculture is decreasing .
Inherited elements of soil with which it is made , if in them only there is deficiency of micro nutrients then deficiency of micro nutrients can occur in intensive crop production and state of leaching .
With the use of excess lime in acidic soils there can be deficiency of micro nutrients .
In acid-sulphate soils production is effected due to toxicity of micro nutrients .
By levelling of land the upper layer of land is scratched in which there are maximum micro nutrients .
Crops giving more produce drain more nutrients from the land , due to which the level of these nutrients in soil goes down .
Consequently deficiency comes across .
Use of main nutrient manure of grade also increases deficiency of micro nutrients .
In submerged state of soil availability of zinc and copper becomes less whereas the availability of iron and manganese increases .
It keeps organic carbon micro nutrients present in soil bound with itself .
It is also known in the form of nutrients storehouse .
At present extreme scarcity of boron has been found even in acidic soils , because leaching of boron is more in these soils .
Zinc : Zinc is an important part of some main enzymes of plants .
Is helpful in the utilisation of phosphorous and nitrogen by plants .
Nucleic helps in acid and protein-synthesis .
Contributes in bio synthesis of hormones .
Its favourable effect has been found on onion , fruits of lemon category and rice crop .
Copper is also a main part of many enzymes .
Increases construction of Vitamin ` A ` in plants and along with this protects plants from many diseases .
Onion , tobacco , tomato , fruits of lemon category , corn etc crops are effected due to this element .
Iron : - Is important for synthesis of green color -LRB- chlorophyll -RRB- and maintenance .
Manganese : controls activities taking place in plant tissues during light and darkness .
Fruits form the category of peas , radish , apple and lemon are more effected from the lack of this element .
Boron : Keeps control on the ratio of potassium and calcium in plants .
Molybdanum : - It is an element of many enzymes .
Helps in Nitrogen use and Nitrogen fixation .
Is important for Rhizobium microbe in nitrogen fixation .
Nickel : - Nickel is the most newly invented important micro nutrient element .
Is an important element of plant enzyme urease .
It is available to plants in the form of Ni2 + .
Symptoms of lack of zinc primarily begin from the upper part of the plants or second or third mature leaves .
Barring middle vein color of leaves become light green-yellow .
Growth of plants stop in crops .
In corn fiber and flowers sprout late and ears in other crops also come out late .
Iron : - Symptoms of its lack are generally seen in alkaline and soil with excessive lime stone .
Molybdenum : - Symptoms of its lack are very similar to the symptoms of lack of nitrogen .
In its deficiency yellow spots are visible in the middle part of the veins of the lower leaves .
Later on edges of leaves begin to dry up and leaves curl towards inside .
Leaves of cauliflower get torn , due to which only some small parts of middle vein and lamina are left remaining .
In this way leaves begin to look like a tail , which is called ` hip tail ` .
Its lack can be especially seen in leguminous crop .
Leaves deficient of Nickel are more red in comparison to leaves replete of Nickel .
Production can stop in leaves deficient of nickel .
Deficiency of nickel surfaces due to presence of zinc , copper , iron , Manganese , calcium or magnesium in excessive amounts also .
Tissues of the tip of soybean leaves die due to nickel deficiency .
Zinc Sulphate -LRB- ZnSO4 .7 H2O -RRB- has been found perfect in various inorganic source of zinc fertilisers .
It is easily available and economically cheaper as well in comparison to difficult to dissolve zinc ores , chelates and mixtures .
Ability of mono hyderated or hepta hyderated zinc sulphate has been found to be similar in removing zinc deficiency in soil or in foliage application .
With the use of zinc sulphate supply of second important nutrient sulphur which is beneficial for crops .
To remove zinc deficiency amount of zinc manures depend on speed of zinc deficiency , soil type , crop and its type .
IN base soils there is deficiency of zinc and calcium .
Therefore to obtain good produce from calcium and zinc deficiency should be obliterated along with toxicity of sodium .
The requirement of zinc fertilisers is double in oilseed crops in sandy soil with minute grains or thick grains when compared to clayey soil .
Because zinc is exploited in extremely less amount by the main crop this is why its exploited effect is much which is received from other crops sowed in crop .
Therefore it is not necessary to use zinc in every crop .
In comparison to use of only zinc the use of zinc with fertiliser has been found beneficial .
The time of zinc usage primarily depends upon zinc quantity in seed and the intensity of its scarcity in the land .
The best time of zinc use is before sowing of crop , because maximum exploitation of zinc happens during the stage of pre-flowering .
In soil the use of original amount of sulphur is the best .
Zinc deficiency can be treated with application of zinc oxide on the seed in land with marginal deficiency of zinc .
Usage ability of zinc fertilisers used in soil is generally less than 5 percent .
Organic fetilisers provides an increase in the usage ability of zinc fertilisers .
Poultry fertiliser has been found to be the most effective in organic fertilisers and its effect is two times in comparison to cow-dung manure .
To get rid of the problem of iron chlorosis water should be filled in nursery during famine .
With the use of green manure , cow dung manure or compost the availability of original iron increases during the time of their rotting .
The deficiency of manganese element has been seen sporadically .
Lack of manganese has been found in rice-wheat inter-crop system especially in Punjab ` s excessively permeable sandy alkaline soil with low organic level .
Lack of copper has been seen only occasionally .
To get rid of the deficiency of copper element copper sulphate is brought in application for the use use in foliage application and land .
To cure deficiency of molybdenum from soil and crops ammonium molybdate and sodium molybdate is used .
In comparison to grain crops vegetables , leguminous and oilseed crops are more effective towards molybdenum use .
The mixed use of ammonium and sodium molybdenum with potassium based fertilisers has been found very effective in increasing usage ability of molybdenum .
From the point of view of economy Foot and mouth disease -LRB- FMD -RRB- is the most general disease .
This disease is extremely harmful to cow , buffaloes , sows etc animals .
Foot and mouth disease status , is the most important factor in livestock products in international market and from the perspective of the the highest price of livestock products in global markets the existence of FMD is an effective hurdle .
In any country or organization the status of animal-disease is a part of its fundamental livestock-infrastructure .
Speciality between countries or regions is recognized through FMD free countries and that country which is not FMD free , there this disease is a main hurdle in the trade of livestock products .
Global distribution of this disease alone , is a reflection of the mirror of world monetary infrastructure , where high income and industrialised countries are generally free from FMD , on the other hand in countries with low income this disease is persistently maintained .
Foot and mouth disease is persistently maintained in developing countries .
In the beginning of the year 1920 , in many countries initiation of control and abolition of FMD began due to the development of inactivated vaccine .
From then till now FMD vaccine is the only vaccine whose production is being done in huge number for effective control of disease .
FMD in India , is an area specific -LRB- endemic -RRB- disease , but is seen in the entire nation .
All animals with twin hoofs , wild animals and other animals who regurgitate -LRB- ruminants -RRB- along with buffalow , goat , swine and elephant are effected with this disease .
Besides this , wild animals with hoofs also get effected with this disease in large numbers .
In India due to this disease direct loss per year has been estimated to be more than 18,000 crore .
Apart from this milk products , meat and skin -LRB- hides -RRB- etc of FMD infected animals are not acceptable in disease free nations , which becomes a reason for lack in export of animal products in the country .
Due to animals wandering independently and freely , the problem of this disease has become more complicated than before .
Generally under first aid of FMD identification of typical clinical symptoms in effected animals is included .
Wounds begin to appear in viremia and inter-digital space of hoofs , which become a reason for paralysis .
Due to group-immunisation ability of animals being dependent on seriousness of disease etc . all symptoms of diseases are not visible in animals .
Generally in indigenous adult animals despite unhealthiness being more than 80 percent death rate is found to be less than 5 percent .
Death rate is found more in young calves due to diversifiable tigerised wounds .
Development of new atomic techniques have helped in recognition of virus serotype , activity and speciality included in the wounds of FMD .
Reverse Transcriptage PCR - In comparison to traditional methods like virus separation this method is very ordinary and fast paced .
To bring re-imorovement in diagnostic ability of PCR latest serotyping MPCR has been developed .
Foot and MOuth Disease -LRB- FMD -RRB- , is a leading disease of first position whose control and abolishment should be done on a global level .
Generally control of FMD disease is done through periodical-concentrated-vaccination program at regular intervals of all effected livestock , till the time disease index does not come to negligible levels .
Before 1950 , in many countries of western Europe this very tactic was followed and they sucessfully eradicated this this disease .
From the year 1992 vaccination has been completely stopped .
Although this tactic is very expensive , even then this tactic is being used a lot in developed nations .
During the term of 10th plan in India , a disease-control program was run in 54 districts of 8 states chosen with the motive of creation of FMD free areas .
Total 32 million animals and buffalows were vaccinated twice a year in these districts .
It is hoped that till 12th planning duration all districts of the entire country will be included under this FMDCP program .
Maize crop is taken in various countries in the world .
Its production is almost 820 million .
It is called corn in United States of America , Australia and Canada .
In India 20 million maize cultivation with 25 percent irrigation capacity in 8 million hectare area takes place in various states , in which Karnataka , Rajasthan , Madhya Pradesh , Andhra Pradesh , Maharashtra , Uttar Pradesh , Himachal Pradesh , Gujarat are primary .
There are many kinds of maize .
Of them sweet corn , dent corn , Lint corn , pop corn , lore corn and pod corn are primary .
It is used in humans , poultry and animal food , in alcohol manufacturing , to add sweetness to the food , to make starch , oil and protein and liquid fuel .
Its use in industrial sector is done for filling of explosives by grinding dry maize the use of which is done in the making of plastic , resin , adhesive and vinegar .
In the production of pesticide also it is used as base .
There are many kinds of maize sheller available in market , but they are very expensive .
For the convenience of farmers central agriculture research institution , nabi baag , bhopal has developed manual tubular maize sheller -LRB- weight 220 gram -RRB- and octagonal maize sheller -LRB- weight 204 gram -RRB- to extract seeds out of dry peeled corn .
With this 18-22 kg kernels per hour can be extracted with this .
They have become extremely popular due to low price and being light in weight .
Training to operate them is also provided by the organization .
Due to low price and being unavailable in market it has also been sold after being made by the organization .
Farming of corn : They were using indigenous seeds in traditional way , from which produce of five quintal was received .
Due to Lupin organization Bhopal buying plastic maize sheller -LRB- 60 rupees -RRB- from Agriculture technology and information center of central agriculture research organization , Bhopal three days ` work got over in one and a half days and the fear of wounds due to sickle blade is also over .
If 13 quintal maize was harvested with sickle the three people would be able to take it out in 20 days and this very work got completed by maize sheller in 8 days .
Also , with the use of sickle that 5 percent kernel which used to get waste , is also saved .
In this way by adapting developed tools approximately 65 kg more kernels were gained .
Lupin organization Bhopal distributed 51 plastic maize shellers in other 9 villages also , whose benefit was gained by farmers .
Constant decrease is being registered in the area of grassslands in our country the main reason of which is encroaching of people on areas of these kinds because grasslands are usually near farmlands .
This is why every year farmer at the time of tilling of farm builds pressure on pastures due to which pasture land is shrinking .
Therefore in future if grassland  grazing land are not saved then pastures for huge animal population will reduce to zero .
Therefore by growing tall grasses and vegetational obstacles fodder crisis can be averted .
Fodder can be produced at unused land in hilly areas .
Grass , leguminous plants can be grown on its upper side by making terrace bund or contour bund preparing face in opposition to the gradient land .
By making ridge on gradient land the erosion of nutrients on the upper layer of land can be controlled .
By stopping flowing rain water soil erosion can be reduced .
By reducing water flow of rain by making ridge more fodder can be produced .
With fodder trees grown on ridge nutrients getting destroyed from land surface can be stopped .
By transplanting elephant grass on the lower level of farm help is received in stopping the flow and erosion of soil , due to which sand is not deposited on the low end of farm .
Least harvest of green fodder on contours prepared without ` V ` shaped valley was received from panicum antidotale -LRB- 9.50 quintal -RRB- .
Dhaman grass is a perennial fodder crop on whose transplantation once one receives fodder for 6 years .
This is why much expense is not incurred in its production .
Least amount of green and dry fodder was received from ginni grass which was 1.24 kg per meter square and 0.28 kg dry fodder per meter square respectively .
Therefore when vegetational hurdles are grown on the ridge of farm and then it is known that they stop erosion of water and soil .
Along with this the availability of green and dry fodder is also maintained .
During the season of rain there remains a serious problem of erosion in loose soils .
Production of seeds take place from vegetational obstacles like grasses .
With which more financial gain is received .
Moonja is received from Paanipoola which is brought in use to make cots .
By sowing khus-khus grass fragrant perfume becomes available .
By making use of grasses in the form of vegetational hurdles it does the task of binding soil grains with each other which saves soil from being wasted away .
In the form of vegetational hurdles ginni grass , blue panic grass , ghaman grass , kans , paanipoola and khus-khus grass -LRB- whatever -RRB- were used .
By looking at the continuous escalating demand for food grains and scarcity of available agricultural land in the shape of til for the nutrition of increasing population of the country it is extremely important that by making saline affected soils worth agriculture maximum produce should be extracted .
By sowing saline tolerant species of rice C.A.R.-36 developed by Central Soil Salinity Research Institute , Karnal in these soils and by increasing its produce financial situation of farmers dependent in alkaline land can be improved .
It has been found through the numbers received through demonstration on the domain of farmers that in comparison to traditional popular species C.A.R.-36 gave 40-60 percent more produce .
The continued depreciation in the production capacity of agricultural land is a challenge for stable producti .
Problems of soil salinity and water clogging receive a boost with the use of unbalanced nutrients in crop produce , more than required irrigation and bad water drainage .
In India approximately 67.3 lakh hectare land is effected from saline and alkaline problems .
This kind of land is found in various regions of India .
To bring about green revolution in eastern India special program has been initiated by Indian government .
Through projects in seven eastern states of country Assam , Bihar , Chhattisgarh , Jharkhand , Odisha , eastern Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal respectively the aim of increasing the produce of rice and wheat has been set .
In these zones approximately 2.25 million hectare soil saline are effected .
Saline tolerant species giving more produce in infertile land has been developed by Cental soil salinity research institute , Karnal .
Its kernel are long , thin and glossy .
The height of plants of its species is till 110 cm and ripening duration is of 140 days approximately .
This species due to being saline tolerant gives more produce in base soils in comparison to general species .
Through this species good produce can be obtained by putting gypsum in base soil as well .
There is ease in doing its harvesting and ridging .
It is a species with long and thin grain whose grain become excessive long on maturation .
In alkaline soil more produce was received from a nursery of more than 30 days .
With the use of biofertilisers the greenery of the plant sustained for many days .
With the use if balanced manure the grain was found to be shiny and in good shape .
In various organic activities there is important contribution of metal ions sometimes less amount and sometimes more .
An important green element -LRB- chlorophyll -RRB- and important red element -LRB- hemoglobin -RRB- of animal world .
Balance of electrolysis in protoplasm of our body ` s cells is also accomplished by ions of some elements .
The main element of bones is calcium which provides a frame to our body .
We know this fact as well since long that because of lack of iodine in our body working of thyroid gland highly messes up .
The production of Thyroid hormone made from thyroid gland whose main constituent is iodine and which is commonly known by the name of thyroxine or T3 , T4 or TSH reduces .
As a result various organic activities are effected in adverse ways .
Total 22 elements are considered important for animal nutrition .
They have been distributed in three sections of which in the most important broad mineral 7 elemets and micro minerals and new semi-minerals are 15 .
Apart form this new semi-mineral enzyme catalyst , helps in developing hormones network .
In exceptional elements Lithium , Beryllium , Aluminium , Scandium , Titanium , Gallium , Germanium and some distinguished gases are main .
Apart from these Molybdenum and Iodine element are important elements for life .
Contribution of hydrogen , oxygen , nitrogen , chlorine , calcium , phosphorus etc remain in the constitution of animal body .
Animal requires some elements very less .
For example flourine , selenium , arsenic etc .
If this mineral element happen to be in excessive concentration then their effect becomes adverse .
Apart from this if concentration of ordinary salt chloride also happens to be more than required then its effect becomes poisonous .
Contrary to this if some necessary element ` s amount in body reduces than requirement even then organism ` s upaapchya activities go of-balance .
Animal becomes a victim of diseases .
In bio chemistry an important task of metal ions is in the form of metal enzymes .
In these metal enzymes metal ion stays attached at active tip .
Among various metal ions every single has its own distinct task in animal body activities .
15 to 20 gram mineral to sheep-goat and 40 to 50 gram mineral mixture to cow buffalo should be fed .
There is more importance of calcium , phosphorus , copper , zinc and cobalt etc in mineral deposits .
Ginger , turmeric , garlic , coriander , fenugreek , caraway seeds and saffron can be successfully grown in various parts of the state in Himachal Pradesh .
By farming these crops economic conditions of farmers can be improved .
Ginger is an important cash crop of Himachal Pradesh .
This is grown on 2,000 hectare land approximately and about 1600 tonne of it is produced .
Farming of ginger is primarily done in Sirmor , Solan , Shimla , Bilaspur , Mandi and Kangra districts .
Fresh and dry ginger -LRB- saunth -RRB- is sent across other parts of the country .
Ginger juice is used in many indigenous medicines which are primarily given in diseases related to cold-cough and stomach .
Besides this is useful in making oil , ginder powder and oleo resin .
For this loamy soil has been found suitable .
Drainage of water from soil should be excellent and bio matter in excessive amount .
Its crop is not very good in base soil .
For ginger farming preparation of farm is done as soon as summers begin .
In summer farm is left after tilling so that soil becomes fertile and able to absorb water .
With cultivation of summer the possibility of catching knot rotting disease reduces .
In the beginning of May in farm re-cultivation is done after putting around 300 quintal of cow-dung manure per hectare .
Farm should be cultivated 3-4 times so that soil becomes very loose and fertiliser is also mixed properly .
Can be grown in both ways on ginger ridges and plain beds .
To gain more harvest from this crop more nutrients are required .
The use of maize crop can be done to provide shade to ginger .
For this after every third row sow one row of maize .
HImgiri : - This is an appropriate kind for the lower and middle regions of Himachal Pradesh and more harvest can be extracted from it .
On this variety there is less outbreak of knot disease .
During monsoon irrigate only when it did not rain .
Till the beginning of rain and later 3-4 irrigation might need to be done .
Water should not clog in ginger farm .
For ginger crop balanced moisture should stay in land .
Mulching is necessary for ginger .
Even weeds do not grow with mulching .
After sowing one should apply mulch of green leaves .
At an interval of three months it is best to apply mulch thrice .
Farm should be weed free and at the time of every hoeing mulching should be done .
For storage chose only disease free fat and healthy knots from disease free region .
Knots received from plants afflicted with diseases become soft and with weak pulp .
All leaves rot except the fiber .
Leaves are initially small and become yellow at the edges .
Later all leaves limp after becoming yellow and finally they dry up .
Yellow disease - This disease takes place due to attack of Fusarium oxysporum and Fusarium solani .
The lower leaves of diseased plant become yellow and later on spreads to all the leaves and the plant wilts .
Irregular spots of white color with black border are formed on the leaves and sides of leaves turn brown .
Tissue boring insect and rhizome maggot are main harmful insects .
Their outbreak in Himachal Pradesh is less .
Root gland nematode : These nematodes are helpful in intensifying rotting and yellow disease in knots .
To make saunth take out bulbs of ginger 7-8 months after sowing when leaves begin to shed after yellowing .
Wash bulbs properly with water so that soil and roots are cleaned from bulbs .
Drum is also used to take out skin of ginger knots .
After taking off the skin dry out knots in sun till 8-10 percent moisture so that the color of saunth becomes white .
Ginger pickle - Wash soft fiber-less ginger and chop it finely after its peel has been taken off .
After heating a little oil above mentioned spices should be roasted lightly .
Mix well chopped pieces of ginger also in it .
Cool after taking off the fire and after filling in vayom keep in sun for 3-4 days .
Ginger chutney - take fresh healthy fiber-less and make pulp after grating it .
Now cook it after mixing sugar in it .
After mincing onion , garlic grinding other spices tying in a loose pack made of cloth keep it in the pulp so that its juice gets mixed in chutney properly .
When it becomes thick like jam while being cooked then cook it for 5 minutes after mixing salt and vinegar at last fill the chutney in a bottle taking off from the fire .
Fennel , is such a crop providing flavor and taste , which gives hearty harvest in alkaline land also .
Fennel is a boon for farmers holding alkaline land because it gives more income in comparison to other crops growing in alkaline like rice , jowar , garlic and spinach etc .
Fennel is a member of Umbelliferae family the birth place of which is Mediterranean region , the climate here is temperate .
Fennel seeds were brought to Indian by foreign invaders , but now this spice crop has made an important place for itself in India ` s agriculture system and food habits .
Fennel is a crop of cold climate .
It requires irrigation in regions with rain less than 50 cm .
For good growth of crops dry and cold temperature is very suitable .
White powdery dew is inflicted on it due to rains along with winters or due to more moisture in air .
During maturation of seed crop matures fast if the weather is sunny .
In the world fennel is a boon for infertile land .
Such alkaline land , the P . H . mean of which is more than 8.5 and other crops are unable to grow in it , in them you can do successful farming of fennel seeds .
For more produce of fennel it is important to give fertiliser and manure in appropriate amount .
Generally it requires 60 kg Nitrogen , 60 kg phosphorus and 40 kg potash per hectare .
During the preparation of farm only 10 tonne rotten manure of cow dung , complete amount of phosphorus and potash is mixed well in soil .
In the production of fennel there is special importance of its varieties .
In infertile land only the advanced varieties of fennel should be planted , so that more produce and benefit can be gained .
Some main advanced varieties of fennel are listed below .
Rajendra Saurabh -LRB- R . F . 17 -RRB- - Rajendra Agricultural University , Dholi has developed this advanced variety through selection method .
This is type with thick grains , from which 8 - 10 quintal per hectare harvest can be obtained after cultivating it successfully in soil enriched with lime .
This kind matures in 210 days and is angbhari disease insulated .
P.F.-35 : - This is a variety which gives more produce .
Its grains are big and fat .
It is best for Gujarat .
The best time for sowing fennel is from mid-september to October .
Ash or sand is mixed while sowing seeds , so that seeds are distributed equally everywhere .
The best time to prepare nursery is from middle to the end of August .
BY soaking fennel seed in water fro 24 hours germination is sooner and more .
If there is scarcity of moisture at the time of germination then three - four days later after sowing do one light irrigation .
When plants become stable completely then irrigate as per requirements at an interval of 15-20 days .
When grains begin to form form flowers then one should not let scarcity of moisture be there .
On scarcity of water grains become thin and light and there is possibility of reduction in produce as well .
After 40-45 days of sowing leaves of fennel become worth using in the form of vegetable and 185-210 days later of sowing become worth reaping .
All bunches of fennel do not mature together , instead respectively bunches prepared mature first and bunches prepared later mature later .
When the color of the seed in bunch begins to change from green color to light yellow color then harvest bunches .
This work is done at an interval of 10-15 days .
If fennel farming is done in infertile land with advanced method then 8-10 quintal per hectare produce can be gained .
During flowering in fennel a pest named Afid is infested .
For its treatment spray 0.3 percent of Phosphamidon .
In fennel farming pure income of 2.30 rupees on investment of 1 rupee is gained .
No other crop can give this much income in an infertile land .
On one hand fennel is a spice while on the other it is a medicine as well .
Fennel has an important role in Ayurvedic medicine method .
Fennel is an infallible medicine for stomach disorders .
Fennel provides coolness during summers .
Grains of fennel act in the form of spice in pickle , sauce , pulses and vegetables .
Various kinds of medicines and fennel camphor is also made form fennel .
Fennel proves especially successful in treating indigestion .
This is not only a spice but is also a domestic remedy .
Its usefulness and medicinal qualities can not be ignored .
It is a well-known fact that use of flowers is done form birth till the death of a human being .
On any festival or celebration more and more flowers are used .
There is abundance of flowers in domestic market also this is why we receive very less market price .
In such a situation value-adding is a good option , when price of flowers in market is received less then we can prepare their various value-added products like garland , string , braid , festoon , flower arrangement , petals , jelly , shorbet , rose water , perfume , potpourri and various products can be prepared after drying flowers .
The process of cutting flowers and preparing products of them is known as value-adding and products prepared in this way are known as value-added products .
Value of products made in this way are enhanced in two ways , one the quality of product becomes really good whether it is some garland , braid , or in the form of flower decoration ; second its marketing value also increases .
By making value-added products income is also more and there is good use of excessive production .
In comparison to fresh flowers one doesn ` t need to take care of these products .
Where the age of fresh flowers is from 2 days to 4 weeks , age of products made of dry flowers can be from 6 months to 10 years .
Products of dry flowers can be made anytime , this is why there sin o requirement of special climate or temperature .
If flowers are kept in a vacuum box after drying then they can be used anytime to make products .
