The problems of Greater Noida west are not abating .
There is rush among the farmer organizations for their demand to stop the construction work .
The farmer struggle committee after calling a Panchayat meet in Maycha village on Sunday has decided to stop the construction work from twenty fifth October on wards .
In the name of giving compensation , the authority and ADM LA office is playing with the farmers by sending two million bucks to the villages .
The farmers have told the Panchayat that the authority is not serious about the problems of the farmers .
At the talk of 25th September the authorities assured the farmers to distribute compensation to all the villages till fifteenth October .
The farmers in the Panchayat on twenty fifth October after creating three to four teams have decided to stop the construction work in greater noida west .
The White Grub which badly damages sugar cane , peanuts and potatoes etc and which is also known as white braided and white Gilar , is no more incurable now .
The scientists of the the National Bureau of Agricultural and useful insects of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research -LRB- ICAR -RRB- , have developed a technique by which this disease would be hundred percent curable .
With this technique the white insects are killed with the help of the friend pests .
The scientists have also developed this technology in powder form for the convenience of farmers .
Under this , at the time of sowing the dry soil of the field , dry manure and dry dung should be mixed and put into the ground .
As soon as the powder comes in contact with the soil it gives birth to the friend pests and they themselves search and destroy the white Grub .
The strange thing is that the friend pests do not eat the caterpillars .
It does not affect the fertility of the soil .
Through this it will not only be able to save sugar cane crops but peanuts and potatoes also .
Due to poor monsoon the decrease in the yield of paddy produce is apparent in the government procurement .
It has been three weeks the procurement of the crop has started .
So far a total of 65 million tonnes of paddy have been purchased .
For the current season that is from this year October to September next year the goal is to purchase 2.40 million tonnes -LRB- 4.1 million tonnes Paddy -RRB- of rice .
It is time for quick arrivals of Paddy in the markets of Punjab and Haryana but the required quantity of Paddy is not reaching .
The Punjab and Haryana government are the first to procure paddy .
But both the states were in the grip of severe drought during the last monsoon season .
The impact is visible in the production of paddy .
Despite these adverse conditions the food ministry has increased the procurement targets more .
The government is patting its back because of the steady increase in farm debt , but the reality is extremely worrisome .
The 94 per cent part of debts incurred in the name of farming goes only to the farmers with big holdings .
Despite the government ` s claim , the banks are not ready to give debts to the small and marginal farmers .
According to the National Sample Survey -LRB- NSS -RRB- , there are 80 per cent small and marginal farmers in the country .
According to this record of the Ministry of Finance , their share in banking debt is merely six per cent .
In recent years , the banks have been pressurized to open accounts of more and more small and marginal farmers .
During the year 2011-12 , a total of 6.35 million accounts were opened for the agricultural sector .
Here the small and marginal farmers had more than 62 per cent of the share .
The banks are supposed to give 18 per cent of total distributed bank credit to the agricultural sector .
India has always been an agricultural country .
Today various career options are available under the agriculture sector .
There are several agricultural universities in the country where facilities for graduate and post graduate level courses are available .
Apart from this better facilities are also available for research .
The students who have passed their 10 +2 with Physics , chemistry , maths or biology can take admission in agricultural engineering .
The students who have passed their 10 +2 with Physics , Chemistry and Biology can take admission in courses related to sericulture .
That branch of Agricultural Sciences under which various diseases of plants are studied is called Plant Pathology .
In Plant Pathology thorough research is done on bacteria , fungi , viruses , microbes , etc .
Under Dairy Technology , you can get specialization in dairy Engineering , dairy chemistry and dairy Bacteriology .
World Food Organization experts have said that the world ` s major grain reserves are lowering and the prices are rising .
Small farmers ` dependence on expensive technologies has put them on debts and their lands are also being snatched .
Like this , the family that works the most for the food production in the country itself suffers hunger , malnutrition and economic crisis .
The protection of the farmers is the first mainstay for the food security because the farmers are only implicated in crisis today .
The landless farm workers should also be brought under the category of small farmer s by at least giving them two to three hectares of land .
It will increase the food production and consequently hunger and malnutrition from the villages will also be too far away .
According to scientists the new technologies will help the farmers to increase the produce and conserve their valuable natural resources .
BT cotton technology is its example .
However , for food commodities there are serious differences on GM technology which needs extensive discussion .
There is need to adopt such a policy that ensures the food security .
The issue of genetically modified or GM crops is again in debate .
Remember that in this context , the Parliamentary Committee has already expressed its fear .
Significantly , doubt on the role of the Assessment Committee associated with genetic engineering had started to begin on the controversy over Bt brinjal .
Finally , all these issues are determined by market economics and politics .
It should also be remembered that with increased use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides the cost of cultivation has already increased wildly .
This fear is not unfounded that the farmers might lose their accumulated knowledge and eventually become a victim of the interests and greed of the seed companies .
The country ` s five million sugarcane producing farmers are in crisis because of the defective sugar cane price and sugar policy of the government .
The Central and State Governments remain under pressure of Sugar lobby while determining the sugar cane price .
The price determination is done keeping only the price of sugar as the base .
Per quintal sugar production price which the sugar industry represents is assumed to be the authentic value .
There are no independent agencies to check the authenticity of these figures .
Due to faulty sugarcane pricing policy of the Central Government the sugarcane and sugar production keeps on fluctuating at the interval of approximately four years .
In 2009-10 , the Central Government of India made an amendment in the Sugarcane Control Act 1966 , by releasing the sugarcane price control Ordinance .
Three -LRB- B -RRB- and five -LRB- A -RRB- was deleted in this ordinance .
The states had the right to determine the sugarcane price in Three -LRB- B -RRB- .
Sugarcane production cost is actually rapidly increasing .
The Central government under the pressure of sugar mill Lobby wants to introduce the freeing of Rangarajan Committee ` s sugar industry .
The ridiculous situation is this that now the court has to determine the price of the produce of the farmers .
Does it happen while determining the price of iron , cement and other industrial produ s ?
No one has control over the natural disasters but for the farmers such disasters are worse than death .
The protection of the labor of the farmers of the country who are totally dependent on the grace of nature is never thought of seriously .
Several crop insurance plans were made , proliferated , but in fact , the farmers have always been duped .
The return of loans and investment in agriculture by the financial institutions is also very low .
Nevertheless the Government ` s approach towards the insurance of husbandry is of negligence .
In 1947 , in central legislation the need over the introduction of nationwide debate for crop insurance was mentioned by Dr . P Rajendra Prasad .
With new dreams Atal Bihari Vajpayee in 1999 had dedicated the National Agricultural Insurance Scheme to the nation .
Not only cereals , oilseeds and commercial crops were included in this , but farmers who do not take loans have also been included in its realm .
Yet no standard has been assessed for the loss of crops .
Anyway , our farmers have a greater percentage of illiteracy and lack of awareness .
Acreage hold of around 25 million farmers is less than one hectare .
These people are unable to pay the premium of two per cent of the total potential production .
The fresh figures of the 2010-11 agricultural census is the new evidence of the plight of husbandry getting complicated in directionless policies .
Most of the farmers use small holdings only to grow grains but the profit is not from the grains but from professional farming .
We grow as much grain which remains rotting in the open , but we import the pulses and palm oil from other countries .
The size of land holdings in the developed countries of the world are big and the population which is subsistence on farming is less .
There are two reasons behind this continued and persistent process of waste in the agricultural sector .
First , the land in India comes to the sons from the father and because of the growing population the size of land holdings is automatically reducing .
Second and the biggest reason is that our government has failed to allocate jobs to the rural population related to farming in other sectors of the economy .
A large section of the human resource of our country is working in the rural areas because the government has no strategies to control the fall in the agricultural sector .
The country ` s farmers are like a patient the government instead of healing whose wounds through its policies is all the more increasing them .
In the past , when the whole country was busy in celebrating Diwali , then at least in three parts of the country , farmers were battling with life and death .
Vidarbha has become the nucleus of farmer suicides in the country , where large number of farmers are committing suicide every year .
Even where the farmers ` land is not being taken directly , the farmers are in trouble .
Consequences of the Green Revolution are now exposed .
Also the requests to reduce the Grant and free trade economic reforms has quickly made farming a deficit profession .
Therefore , the question of better prices of sugarcane for the farmers of Western Maharashtra has become a question of life-and-death .
If one looks at the government figures , since 1995 till 2011 seventy thousand farmers in the country have committed suicide .
C. Rangarajan is the head of prime minister ` s economic advisory council and the strong solicitor of economic reforms .
Last day a six-member committee headed by him made a recommendation related to the fully control free sugar industry to the prime minister .
If these recommendations are accepted then it will be a shock for the farmers of the country .
If it happens then the prices of the sugarcane will come down at one go .
The Rangarajan Committee report can give birth to many farmer revolutions and shooting incidents .
If we look at the current farming landscape of the country then Bt cotton is the only available gm crop in the market .
In fact the central government and the industries have presented this success story with a hype .
But the ground reality it totally opposite .
The parliamentary committee on agriculture had issued a study report related to this in the parliament ` s monsoon session .
Because of the heavy price of the seeds the farmers are burdened with heavy debts .
For the food security we make such policies that make use of the new technologies , and increase food production .
In fact the exact meaning of food security is the availability of cheap and nutritious food within the reach of everyone .
Due to the rising price of food for a long time we have not been able to get rid of the problem of malnutrition .
Today , ownership of 95 per cent of cotton seed is with 60 Indian seed licensing companies in the hands of Monsanto through agreements .
If the gm crops arrive , the government would hand over the most important seed market of the agriculture management to the multinational companies .
The establishment of Govind Ballabh pant agriculture and technological university , Pantnagar was the dream of the first prime minister of the country , Jawaharlal Nehru .
The university built by his own efforts has the prestige of becoming the first agricultural University of the country .
This University is setting new standards of success in the midst of world level competition in agriculture sector .
Right after its establishment the university has done several remarkable works in the field of research along with bringing the green revolution .
To increase the farm yield the university has developed more than two hundred and fifteen species of grains so far .
At present in the University work on two hundred and sixty two research projects are under way .
Students are being imparted knowledge in one hundred and thirty five courses of the departments located in these colleges .
The villagers are being independent because of MANREGA and the barren lands are being fertile with the help of `` Self land , self work `` scheme .
When Mahatma Gandhi guaranteed employment planning for the villagers had initiated it was being associated only with employment .
Almost after six years the effect of MANREGA is clearly visible in the villages of Rajasthan .
A large section of the southern part of Rajasthan is populated with tribals .
Not only women but the men also had almost no work to do .
The area surrounded by hills had very little farm acreage .
But now changes can be seen in this area .
The effect of MANREGA is visible not only in a single village but in the entire area .
The most important role of change in this area was that of the scheme `` self farm self work `` under the operation MANREGA .
Because of this not only the landscape of the tribal area but also the fate of the tribals has changed .
They are now farming on the barren lands .
They are playing their part in production through gardening .
The farmers are also adopting innovations in farming by improving their farm .
This program is proving to be a boon for the villagers .
In the first phase of this program , activities related to the families of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes were included .
In this the people whose livelihood was dependent on land & farming were benefited .
After this the frontier farmers and in the last phase small tenants were also included in this program .
The goal of the program was to bring economic strength in the life of tenants of poor strata .
Keeping this in mind , arrangements were made for the uninterrupted monitoring of the program .
Every fortnight technical guidance for work is given by the farm supervisors .
Farmer Shankar Mali says that the program `` Self farm self work `` has entirely changed the situation of the farmers .
He says that after the beginning of this program under MANREGA the for any kind of work the farmers did not have to face the crisis of workers .
The amazing thing is that there is record grain production even where there were only bushes .
The farmers are now strengthening their livelihood by taking twin crops from their farms .
Now along with improvements in the economic condition of the villagers , money is also being saved .
Village farmer Arvind Jat said that they had to face a lot of difficulties because of the lack of route for transportation .
They had to bring the seeds from the farm to the main street by keeping them on their heads and walking two kilometers but now there is no problem because of the gravel street made under the MANREGA scheme .
To get the increased and quality produce of onion it is necessary to prepare a nursery using healthy and high quality of seeds .
Because the production of good and more stable and salable crop is the goal of a farmer .
That is why the importance of the production of high quality seeds increases all the more .
If the seeds are of high quality then its production will also be high & good with which the farmer will be benefited more .
Actually not many people eat onions .
Yet it is called the ` Queen of Kitchen ` .
To prepare the seed , good variety of condyle of onion is transplanted in the month of October which gets prepared in April .
After preparing the field the condyle of onion is transplanted in such a manner as that of potatoes .
This crop needs little irrigation along with one to two times of weeding and sowing .
Alongside anti fungal medicine is also sprayed once or twice .
The onions get ready in six months .
Selling the fresh onions dug from farm itself yields 200-300 bucks per quintal .
The same onions are sold at five to six hundred bucks per quintal when stored for months .
That is why it is more profitable to sell the onions after storing them .
Black and loamy soil is more useful for the production of Onions and seeds .
Polythene mulching crop production technology employs many complex works .
By adopting the right methods and specifications of this technology both groundnut production and its productivity can be increased in India .
There are a lot of seed and soil borne diseases in groundnut .
Which harms the sprout as well as the sapling to a great extent .
The treatment of the seeds shall be done a week before sowing .
In normal conditions the groundnut crop requires approximately 400-500 mm of water .
The availability of sufficient water increases the yielding capacity of the produce at the important phases of flowering , fruit and maturity .
Droplet and fountain irrigation technique is the best in Polythene mulching technique .
The wastage of 40-50 percent water through irrigation in groundnut production is either through evaporation or discharge .
With this polythene mulching technique the wastage of water through evaporation can be made less .
The crop grown through polythene mulching technique matures 7-8 days before the crop grown through simple technique .
The harvesting can be done in a simple way through plucking the plants with hands or with bullock or tractor run harvester .
The biggest threat for the future of farming in India is that of water .
In the recent years radical changes in the rainy season has become a common incident .
If it happens consistently then it shall pose as a threat on the food security and livelihood of lakhs of Indians .
The biggest weapon with the farmers in such a complication is the water saving technique .
Polythene mulching technique is the beginning of an innovative phase .
With the progress in technology our knowledge of beauty is also increasing .
In today ` s scientific age the growing of flowers , fruits , vegetables and decorative & attractive plants within farming technology is called `` Horticulture `` .
The branch associated with the promotion and management of trees , bushes , leaves , greenery and flowery plants under horticulture is called `` floriculture `` .
Because of the changing social values of today the demand and use of flowers has increased .
Because of the various uses like festivals , decoration , medicinal value , oil , perfume etc . there is increase in the demand of fruits and leaves .
There is imbalance in the nature because of the increasing population in towns , residences and transportation .
Today gardening is not our hobby it has become our need .
Which not only provides beauty and greenery to the environment but also regulates the increasing temperature .
It controls the land erosion .
In the increasing synthetic environment flowers and plants build beauty and vividness .
These gardens are our vigilant today in protecting the environment .
Today we have ample space but with lack of proper knowledge of ornamented horticulture we can not progress in every field .
Attracting the youngsters attention in this direction is correct so that the girls and boys interested in gardening can adopt it in a professional way .
According to personal interest ornamented gardening can be done in the empty spaces near the home .
Today space is left for the parks emerging colonies of every town and cities .
Where the beauty can be increased by developing the ornamented horticulture .
It should be noted to keep proper place for walking and sufficient space for the children to play .
It is essential to make gardens near every industrial area to keep away from pollution .
There such species of plants should be planted which can resist all the seasons and provide greenery and fresh air .
The specificity of the ornamented garden should be that the viewers should get amazed by looking at it .
It should also have a collection of important species of plants .
At present ornamented gardening is the prime concern of our environment conservation .
It has become evident through the report of United Nations food and agriculture organization that water logging of the 27 million tonne eroded soil is when the soil becomes alkaline .
There is big part of land among the land fit for farming which is saline and alkaline .
Its total area is approximately seven million hectares .
The fertility of the soil degrades because of the excess of soluble salts of sulphate and chloride in the soil .
Excess use of water in agriculture and water logging instead of making the soil fertile turns it into saline soil .
Although several programs such as land reform program , barren land reform program and many other programs are being run by the central government .
Yet it is a big challenge in front of the world to stop the desertification of land .
The soil has four layers .
The first or the uppermost layer is made from small soil particles and the remains of rotten plants and animals .
This layer is significant for crop production .
These days special emphasis for the investigation of soil is laid from the Indian government .
Apart from this camps are also being organized in the villages to educate the farmers .
Because soil investigation is the basis for the management decisions concerning fertilizers related needs .
In India central laboratory is established in Karnataka , Assam , Keral , Tamilnadu , Haryana and Orissa .
Apart from this laboratories are being run in different states .
The presence of minerals like nitrogen , potassium and phosphorous is viewed in the fertility of the soil .
Because of the irrigation mismanagement in India approximately six-seven million hectare land is affected from salinity .
West Bengal , UP , Bihar and the north eastern states of the country face the problem of water logging .
For a prolonged time the uneven territory remains flooded with rainy water .
Like wise it becomes harder during summer .
In such a situation its acidity increases and farming could not be possible .
If this problem is neutralized then there will be unexpected increase in the crop production .
There becomes lack of nutritive elements in acidic soil .
The possibility of soil erosion increases with this .
In the changing scenario there remains flood and famine situation with fluctuation in the activity of monsoon .
The arable land gets affected due to flood .
The top layer of the soil is washed away with the flowing water of the flood .
Other small particles along with nitrogen , phosphorous , potash , calcium and magnesium in the soil flows with the flowing water .
With this the land of the farmers become infertile .
In such a situation in order to save the soil the most appropriate way is to adopt a crop cycle which is favorable to the soil .
In order to be safe from the water borne erosion , more farming of rooted crops shall be done .
In order to stop the high speed flow of water in the flood affected area dams are built at places .
The farmers working on Parcener farming should be specially assisted in building small barriers .
The agriculture scientists believe that the first food of plants is water .
It transmits the elements present in the soil in the form of food to the plants .
It is essential for the soil to have appropriate humidity .
That is why water management is most essential .
Undoubtedly after green revolution there is three to four times increase in the production capacity .
Its chief reasons have been the choice of high quality seeds , fertilizers , insecticides , irrigation etc .
In a desire for more production all the farmers have recklessly started using chemical fertilizers .
With this production increased for a while but the fertility of the soil degraded which could be a danger for the future .
More and more use of green grass should be there in the farm .
The inclusion of different kinds biological elements of the field in this .
The strength of the soil increases and the production is also more .
Similarly in the direction of soil conservation biological farming is most significant .
Where the farmers can get quality produce through biological farming , they can also increase the fertility of the soil .
The plants get all the necessary and significant & micro nutritive elements by using biological fertilizers .
There in increase in all the beneficial organisms present in the soil .
Seeing the significance of biological farming the central and the state government is promoting it through several programs .
Not only this the price of biological produce is also getting more as compared to the other products .
We get to know about the availability level of the necessary nutritive elements of the plants through soil fertility .
Generally the soil fertility depends upon the physical , chemical and biological qualities .
There is lack of nitrogen in the soil of country everywhere .
Along with nitrogen comprehensive lack of phosphorous has been felt in many areas .
Primarily lack of zinc and ferrous in several micro nutritive elements is seen in many areas of the country .
Lack of zinc is primarily in the soils of Punjab , UP , Uttarakhand , Andhra Pradesh , Bihar , Tamil Nadu , Gujrat and Madhya Pradesh .
It is also remarkable here that ` Khaira ` disease and the yellowing of wheat leaves is because of the lack of zinc .
In our country , the lack of zinc is primarily found in lime soil and the soil with bad drainage .
There is less use of cow dung manure and animal ` s excreta & bed in the farms .
Consequently there is ever increasing lack of organic elements in the soil .
Because of lack of organic elements in the soil , the present beneficial organisms and creature-animals shall become extinct .
Due to lack of micro nutritive elements the produce of cereals , pulses , oil seeds and horticulture is getting affected .
In spite of excess use of nitrogen and phosphorous fertilizers there is no increase in our crop production .
In some parts there is excess of deficiency in the number of beneficial organisms in the soil due to irrigation with saline water .
Because of the similar crop cycle in farming every year there is increase in the number of harmful micro organisms .
In the north-western and north-eastern states of India , under intensive farming system this problem is becoming more serious .
The farmers should regularly testify the soil while adopting intensive agriculture system .
The fertility of soil can also be increased by adopting appropriate crop cycle .
Cereals should also be grown along with pulses in crop cycle .
pulse crops increases the the amount of nitrogen in atmosphere .
At the same time increases the amount of organic elements for prosper and stable farming .
For this full and wide publicity is needed so that the farmers are tend towards this .
One should get the soil of their farm tested in laboratory to know about the fertility of the soil .
The precision of the amount of manures and fertilizers should be made only on the basis of the testing of the farm soil .
It helps to maintain a balance between the soil health and its fertility .
It will also put an end to the unnecessary use of fertilizers .
This facility is freely available in the nearest agriculture universities , agricultural research centers and agriculture scientific centers .
We get the following information with soil testing .
The soil is classified into acidic , alkaline and neutral on the basis of pH value .
Just as the pH of different soils is different similarly the plants have different pH needs .
We get the knowledge of the position of nitrogen , phosphorous , potash , sulphur and other micro nutrients like zinc , iron and manganese through soil testing .
Soil is a very significant natural resource .
The basis of farming is soil and water .
While deciding the scale of development and prosperity of future opportunities , the present society should also be thought upon .
If proper care is not paid towards soil management , the next generation shall have no escape from famine , malnutrition and starvation .
Looking at the present scenario it is absolutely necessary to save the decreasing fertility of the soil .
Then only stable and perpetual production will be possible .
From the past several years the crop production is either stable or decreasing the chief reason behind which is the deteriorating health and decreasing fertility of farmland .
There is adverse effect on the fertility of the soil due to inappropriate and unbalanced use of chemical fertilizers .
The chemical fertilizers are being used in an unbalanced way so much so that the harmful effects are clearly visible now .
The proportion of nitrogen , phosphorous and potash in the last year had been of the ratio 9:3:1 which is excessively unbalanced .
The decreasing soil fertility has become a subject of concern in our country .
The faulty irrigation system is directly or indirectly responsible for this .
Consequently there is increase in the production cost of farming and also an adverse effect on the fertility of the soil .
The portion of the farm where the irrigated water remains for a long time , the physical condition of that portion becomes bad .
Irrigation with the hard and saline water leaves an adverse effect on the physical , chemical and organic quality of the soil .
There is loss of sprouting in the seeds because of prolonged irrigation with saline water .
The plants are not so long in the initial stage and they remain small .
Therefore inferior quality of water is harmful for the soil fertility .
There is perpetual decrease in the livestock in the farming today .
In the beginning the farming depended on bullocks .
Because of the mechanization of farming , not a single pair of bullocks in the entire village can be seen .
The small dams are no more safe for tractor and heavy machines because of which a large part of rainy water gets wasted by being washed away .
A large part of the nutrients given to the crops also get washed away along with rainy water .
The fury of increasing weeds in the farmland is a big problem which automatically gives rise to different problems .
These weeds exploits the water and nutrients given to the crops because of which there is loss in the quality , produce and fertility of soil .
Thus the farmer is not able to get the required profit of his crop .
Finally there is loss in the fertility of the farmland .
The top layer of soil is very significant natural source .
The plants are helped while their growth at this layer .
The uncontrolled water in rainy season is making lakhs of hectares of farmland a barren land by washing it .
Thus at one place there is depreciation in the fertility of the land and at other place the irrigation water , a important component of crop production , gets wasted by being washed away .
Such a disdain for a agricultural country is inappropriate .
It is seen that the educated people do not take interest in farming , they are escaping from the villages .
If we want to save farming and deal with food security along with increasing production then it is necessary to drive a campaign to add educated people into farming .
For this the farmers taking debts should be trained with the use of debts .
They should be acquainted with the innovative techniques of farming while training so that they should not be in loss during the extreme conditions of the season .
Through soil testing the farmers should do such a farming in which they do not have to suffer a loss .
There is a need to encourage the farmers in this regard .
For this operating the activities of horticulture by cluster planning could be a good option so that the availability of market becomes easy .
To increase fish production , pisciculture should be done and more and more fishing credit cards should be provided to the farmers .
Along with increase in neat cattle , intensive breed reform program and milk inducing cattle program should be carried .
If we wish to increase the production of major crops in each village a micro plan should be made and the use of certified seeds to produce crops should be promoted .
The production of crops can be increased by using social engineering .
To increase the overall production the farming staff should be sent for a production visit in selected villages .
Not only this by organizing seeds and dairy committees the farmers should be associated and encouraged to operate a single activity .
There are lack of resources to increase crop production in the country .
The crop produce and production can be increased with technical and combined efforts .
Sowing crops after improving fallow land may also be beneficial .
But it is important to select the advanced agricultural technology and rural areas in fixed time .
Our Country is agriculture dominant .
The progress of the country is related to the progress of agriculture .
Advanced farming techniques can only lead to the peak of advancement .
The agriculture officers should work with hard work and strong determination in order to make farming a profitable business .
Farm pond planning is quite helpful to get riddance from the problem of irrigation , the farmers should get its appropriate benefits .
The attraction towards organic farming should be increased all the more .
Not only this , driving awareness campaign towards processing , storage and post harvesting management shall also be beneficial for the farmers .
Making farming profitable is not only the objective of agriculture department , it should be connected with the representatives .
In order to bring quality reform in the production of traditional crops it is needed to work in a comprehensive way .
There should be increase in production by using high quality techniques and increased plantations .
The work plan for horticulture should be made according to the district ` s climate and local resources .
The concerned departments shall execute mutually by making joint plans for horticulture action plan .
Burning the remaining crop after harvesting might be a dangerous step for farming .
With this there is possibility of fire accident in farms and there is also a adverse effect on the fertility of the soil .
In this regard the farmers should understand that at any cost they will not burn the hay .
The farmers should be informed that the fertile layer of the farm is 6 inches above the top layer .
There are different kinds of bacteria present in this .
Flat act should be framed for the proper supervision and correct maintenance of the flats .
Also the farmland could be saved from being barren .
There should also be a provision in the act that only farming is to be done at the farmland .
Other activities harming agriculture shall be restrained .
Implementing flat act where there is no flat act could play an effective role .
For this we have to step forward with participation .
Mahatma Gandhi guaranteed employment planing can play a significant role in this .
A survey team should be made to study the villages with this all the villages shall be fully benefited .
The survey team shall inquire about the major produces and the possible industries of the villages .
After this the major produce of that village shall be fixed .
Here the whole village can work as a single unit .
The villagers will themselves prepare the produce together and the share of the profit will be equally distributed among everyone .
For this the villagers shall be trained properly .
The rare species of animals and birds shall be saved .
There shall also be increase in their conservation and enhancement .
Fruits-flowers and historical heritage shall be evolved globally .
The villagers shall also be able to work for a good image of their produce .
This will put an end to the emigration from the villages , the villages shall be independent , it shall bring prosperity to the villages and the spread evils shall be mitigated .
Revolutionary changes in agriculture field can only be brought through ambitious goals .
Whatever plans are made for the agriculture and farmers shall be based on the ground reality .
The agriculture department has a significant role in changing the developmental fate of the state .
For this it is needed to strengthen result oriented work plan .
The farmers should be provided with right kind of manure , seeds , medicines and equipment , finally for this proper arrangements shall be made .
Even in low rainfall , less fertile , acidic , saline and alkaline soil barley crop gives better yield as compared to wheat .
Barley crop gives good yield even in the availability of limited resources .
Uttar Pradesh , Rajastha , Punjab , Haryana , Madhya Pradesh , Himachal Pradesh , Uttarakhand and Gujrat are the chief barley growing states .
Barley crop is grown in 8.47 lakh hectares in our country , while the total barley production is 16.7 lakh tonnes .
The average barley production is 19.6 quintal per hectare .
Barley is also a commercial and industrial crop .
Barley is also used to make different kinds of medicines .
It is also used to make malts , beer , brandy , whisky and other different kinds of drinks .
Barley is a nutritious , healthy and digestive food .
The hay obtained from barley crop is the favorite and tasty food of the animals .
Barley is also used as green fodder .
Its grains are also used to feed hens and animals .
Barley is grown as Rabi crop in our country .
Cold and humid climate is best for growing barley .
Barley is a temperate crop but it can also be easily grown in subtropical climate .
Its farming is done easily in an area of 60-100 cm annual rainfall .
It can easily be grown 4000 m above sea level .
It needs 250-300 c temperature for sprouting .
The yellowing of barley at the time of flowering could be dangerous .
The barley plants have sufficient capacity to resist dryness .
Excess humidity at the time of harvesting puts adverse effect on the produce .
The soil should have sufficient humidity at the time of sowing .
Due to lack of humidity the seeds can not sprout properly .
Sowing should be done in north-western direction so that all the plants get sufficient sun rays and for a longer duration .
The dwarf and partially dwarf varieties of barley need more of manures and fertilizers .
The manures and fertilizers have special contribution in ample and quality production .
In major parts of the country barley crop is grown in rainy season .
Also barley has more capacity of bearing dryness as compared to other cereal crops .
There has always been different kinds of experiments in India .
Indian farmers through their experiments are being popular in world today .
Some farmers believe in doing something new and different other than the norm .
Such farmers set examples for the people of their region .
To say , Farrukhabad district of Uttar Pradesh is known for its potato production , but now the farmers here are also getting attracted towards the farming of other crops other than potatoes .
These farmers have left traditional farming of potatoes and taken up the farming of Mentha .
After getting more profit at low cost , all the farmers of the village have taken up the farming of Mentha .
The farmers believe that whatever farming is done , that should be beneficial .
Om Prakash from Valipur of Farrukhabad initiated the farming of Mentha .
After this the entire village is engaged in its farming .
Om Prakash said that he has been doing potato farming for so many years .
His family members were also dependent on potatoes , but since the past 3-4 years the expenditure on potatoes had been increasing .
The way there is increase in the expenditure of potatoes , that ways there isn ` t any profit .
We began the arrangements of new farming with the same thought .
Om Prakash says that he was an ordinary farmer but when he started the farming of Mentha , he became a special one .
He was identified as a medicinal farmer among all the villages of the area .
During the same time Panchayat elections were held . .
The villagers looking at his sincerity made him the chief candidate .
Om Prakash says that he got full support during the head ` s election .
The farmers promoted him with an open heart and he was assigned the responsibility of village head .
Now after being the village head he is expressively performing his responsibilities .
Om Prakash says after being elected as the village head he thought that apart from himself he should also think about other farmers .
That is why he also gave the training of Mentha to the other farmers .
He told the people about the benefits of Mentha farming .
There after all the people of the village got engaged in the farming of Mentha .
The Mentha plant is used in Ayurvedic medicines .
The extracted oil is used in large amounts in vicks , toothpaste , cold oil etc .
That is why Mentha buyers are easily available at the farm right after its harvesting .
The entire Ayurvedic companies buy Mentha crops .
They also make all kinds of medicines with this .
Om Prakash says that his entire family is happy since he has started the farming of Mentha .
The family feels that they are doing such an activity that has increased their prestige in the society .
The soil of our country is suitable for fruits .
It is because of this reason that we are also growing the fruits which are originally belong to other countries .
Today we are at the second position in the world in fruit production .
If we employ scientific techniques we can also move beyond .
If the processing and storage is done properly after harvesting then it can also raise the income .
Fruits occupy a special place in our diet .
Fruits and the foodstuffs made from fruits not only make our food tasty but also provide necessary nutrients such as vitamins , minerals , carbohydrates and fibrous food etc .
Also with this there is strong possibility of job creation and earning in the village sector .
Looking at the high yield and significance of fruits , we see that they also provides more benefits from per hectare area through economic profits .
Due to diversity of climates in India , mangoes , bananas , papaya , grapes etc . have a special significance in the production of various fruits .
There is seldom a fruit which is not grown in India .
There is great impact of the changing economic situation , life style , food habits etc . on the demand of foodstuffs .
There is perpetual demand for the fresh and processed foodstuffs among the consumers .
The nature of fresh fruits is mortal that is why if they are not kept properly after harvesting they do not remain fit for consumption .
Fruits undergo a long series of maintenance before being used in our country , which leads to the necessary physical-chemical changes in its structure .
India occupies the second position in the world in fruit production .
While the total fruit production in the country is 46.6 million tonne , India produces 10.3 percent fruits of the world .
Among different fruits in the world , the total participation of India in the production of banana is 29 percent , mangoes is 46 percent and papaya is 30 percent .
Indian food is considered to be the most tastier and healthier of all .
While at one place the spices used in our food enhance the flavor at other place they are also famous for their medicinal values .
South India especially Kerala is known for its mines of spices .
Its climate and environment is favorable for coconuts and cashew nuts along with spices .
India exports spices to almost 140 countries of the world .
The major spice grown here are - cloves , black pepper , turmeric , cinnamon , green and black cardamom , mace , chilies etc .
Clove is matchless among Indian spices .
This spice has uzinol which is protuberance free .
Cloves are helpful in combating diseases like heart ailments , cancer and arthritis .
cinnamon is the bark of a tree which is very tough and light brown colored .
Like cloves it also has the capacity to fight various diseases .
Eating half a teaspoon of cinnamon powder everyday cures diabetes .
Recently poly phenol are found in this which are anti-oxidants .
Therefore cinnamon also cures heart diseases .
Cardamom are of two types , small and big .
Cardamom helps in digesting food .
While it makes the food tastier , its production can also fetch more profits .
Red chilies are the integral part of Indian food .
Along with taste it also provides color to the food .
Like the rest of the spices red chilies also have antiseptic and anti cancerous values .
About two lakh thousand tonnes of whole and powdered chilies were exported from India .
Its value in rupees is 1292 crore rupees .
The traditional buyers of Indian red chilies are Malaysia , Srilanka , Bangladesh and Indonesia .
Turmeric is the most significant spice of India if one looks from the perspective of medicinal value .
A compound named `` Karkumin `` present in turmeric provides it yellow color and medicinal value .
Using turmeric in the diet can combat horrific diseases like cancer .
Eating the vegetable made from the stems of raw turmeric is defensive against arthritis .
Along with medicinal value turmeric is also useful in beauty and cosmetics .
It is useful in making the skin bacteria free and at the same time it also makes the skin radiant .
It is because of these properties that there is more demand of turmeric in the world .
It is known through the fresh figures that India is the largest exporter of turmeric in the world .
Black pepper has a specific identity among spices .
It is black , small and grain like in appearance .
Apart from being used in food , black pepper is also used in ayurvedic medicines .
Along with these spices there is also great demand for the seeds .
Whole coriander , coriander powder , fennel and cumin seeds are major spices among these seed spices .
Fenugreek seeds are very useful because of their medicinal value .
Coriander has the quality of digesting food .
Mint is also very useful from this point of view .
Hence taking coriander and mint sauce with food helps in keeping the digestive system well .
Like the rest of the spices coriander and mint also work as anti-oxidants .
According to the recent research done coriander is found to have the value of reducing bad cholesterol .
Ginger is also matchless among the spices which keep the digestive system intact .
Like turmeric ginger is also anodyne and anti protuberant .
Recently ginger is found to have anti cancerous values .
Because of these qualities of ginger , its export is incessantly increasing from India .
Chewing one or two buds of garlic everyday with water helps to stay away from heart diseases .
The pungent smell in garlic is due to the presence of Ellison .
The medicinal values of garlic is because of the sulphur present in it .
It is also an anti-oxidant and it stops the clotting of arteries .
Garlic is effective in cold-cough and it is an antibacterial protecting the skin from fungal infections .
Apple occupies the major position among the fruits grown in temperate climate .
Apple is also the main course of people in many countries .
Due to lack of production for many years it was thought to be the fruit of only the rich .
Among the fruits grown in temperate climate in India , apple has almost 75 percent of the share .
In India it is primarily grown in Himachal Pradesh , Jammu & Kashmir , Uttarakhand and some parts of northeastern states such as Arunachal Pradesha , Meghalaya and Manipur .
According to the figures , there is 35-40 percent damage in apples after harvesting and the major role is of the post harvesting diseases .
The fruits should be protected from any kind of cut while harvesting .
The plucking of fruits shall be done at complete maturity .
In order to decrease the temperature of the fruits after plucking , Pre-cooling should be done so as to decrease the breathing rate of fruits .
After plucking , Packing , transportation , storage and marketing should be up kept properly .
The fruits should be pruned and the damaged fruits should be immediately removed after plucking .
After washing the containers used for packing fruits should be properly cleaned .
The place where packaging is to be done shall also be clean .
Generally big fruits are more prone to diseases while storage .
Therefore as far as possible , the storage of apples shall be done in short term only .
To control the pathogens after plucking the fruits , the biological control method is becoming popular everyday .
In order to control the pathogens in this method , some organism especially microorganisms are used .
Vanilla is totally a warm climate plant and grows in warm and humid environment 1,000 to 1500 meters above the sea level .
For its overall growth approximately 1500 to 3000 mm average rainfall and 210-350 Celsius temperature is required .
Since vanilla is a creeper it needs support and 50 percent shade for growth .
Its extra plants can also be given the support of sticks in initial stages .
According to the estimates , approximately 1600 to 2000 plants can be planted in one hectare area .
The appropriate time for vanilla plantation in India is between august-September , because the velocity of south-western monsoon is less during this time .
Vanilla can be grown separately or with some other crops like coconut , nut , coffee , or rubber .
Vanilla creepers require regular irrigation for good growth .
During summers , irrigation should be done at the interval of 2 to 3 days for 2-3 years from the time of sowing .
To provide ample light and air to the vanilla plants and to lessen the competition for nutrients regular pruning is essential .
Generally , yellow , weak and old creepers are kept aside by pruning .
Vanilla needs approximately 5 percent shade to grow .
Generally the flowering of vanilla begins after the third year of plantation and the produce is maximum in the 7th and 8th year of sowing .
Its flowering phase is generally from December to April and the effect of height is on flowering .
Vanilla has the following three major factors that affect flowerin .
The irrigation should be stopped after north-eastern monsoons that is when the flowers are ready for flowering .
The front part of the vines should be cut and the older creepers should be separated by pruning which had buds the last year .
The shade should be removed for sometime so that the creepers get ample amount of sun rays .
The Vanilla bud is the main source of vanilla essence .
It is extremely essential to collect the buds at right age and enhance them carefully using appropriate method so as to get the right fragrance of vanilla .
Generally it takes 8-9 months for a flower to pollinate and grow as bud .
The appropriate time to store the fruits is when the buds are ripe and they start yellowing .
If the fruits are stored before ripening , the quality of essence obtained from them is not good .
Since ancient times , turmeric has been boggled in the social , religious and economic life of Indians .
The ancient literature of India is flooded with the different uses of turmeric .
Turmeric was used in wounds , cuts , cold , cough , cosmetics , religious rituals , witchcraft etc .
Turmeric was believed to be originated in south-east Asia and China .
East Himalaya to Srilanka region in India is known to be the region related to the origin of turmeric .
Since ancient times turmeric was identified as yellow colored and bitter tasting ginger .
The mention of turmeric reaching China was found in the travel details of Marcopolo much before 17th century .
Turmeric was used as dye in east and west Africa till 30th century .
Turmeric has been used as an coloring agent in south Asia before the use of artificial colors in Europe .
India has the monopoly of producing and exporting turmeric in the world .
More than 60 percent area in the total spice producing area of India comes from turmeric .
The farming of turmeric in India is done on 1 , 73 , 900 hectares of area .
Where 8.5 lakh tonnes of produce is received every year .
Other than India the major turmeric producing countries are Bangladesh , Srilanka , Pakistan , Thailand , China , Taiwan , Haiti , Jamaica and Peru .
Because of the special shape , color and taste of the species of turmerics in India , there is great demand of turmerics in International markets .
The average production of turmerics in India is 4,286 k . g .
The major turmeric producing states in the country are Andhra Pradesh , Orissa , Tamilnadu , Assam , Maharashtra and Karnataka .
The farming of turmeric is also done in Gujarat , Kerela , Bihar , Uttar Pradesh and northern states apart from these states .
The scientific name of turmeric is Kurkuma Lunga .
India has 30 species of turmeric .
The height of the plants are between 60-90cms .
The underground stems of the plant are called turmeric .
The stems have shining yellow color and a peculiar flavor and taste .
The stems are used as turmeric .
The flowers are white and yellow colored .
The fruits are rare .
The sprouting phase of turmeric begins after one month of plantation .
Drying and boiling changes the color of turmeric to yellow .
There are no side-effects of turmeric .
Turmeric is called the Saffron of India .
The fresh leaves of turmeric is used to give flavor to the foodstuffs in Indonesia .
The farm should be made ready by tilling the farm five times with 25 cm depth .
The farm should be weed free .
40 tonne cow dung manure or compost should be mixed in every hectare of farm .
Tilling should be done after Rabi crop during summers .
Sandy and loamy soil with good drainage system is perfect for turmeric farming .
Warm and humid climate is good for the growth and development of turmeric plants and stems .
The frequency of irrigation depends on the season and land .
Heavy soil requires 15-25 irrigation and light farm requires 34-40 irrigation .
Basil is the integral part of Indian culture and tradition .
Basil has been found in the courtyard of Hindus since ages and it is considered to be holy and worth worshiping from the perspective of its medicinal values .
We all know that any ritual of life is incomplete without basil .
The botanical name of the plant from Lemiasi family known as basil in English is osimum tinuflorum .
Few varieties of basil are also identified as osimum sanctum .
Basil farming is done commercial in various countries like France , Egypt , Hungary , Indonesia , America Israel etc .
Even in various states of India commercial farming of basil has started .
In Azamgarh of Uttar Pradesh , more than 5,000 farmers are involved in the business of commercial cultivation of basil .
According to the farmers they immediately sow peas after basil and thus they get double income .
The commercial farming of basil can be done easily in every kind of land and climate .
Its farming is generally totally dependent on rainy water .
The most suitable time for the farming of basil is July-august .
The rotten manure should be used at the field .
The field should have slope like structure so that there is no scope of water logging .
It is suitable to sow the seeds in the field prepared after first rain .
Its seeds can easily be put into the field through sprinkling .
Since its seeds are extremely small , therefore their depth in the field should be around 0.3 c.m .
The plants can also be prepared in nursery through plantation and their farming can be done .
The plants start growing within 8 to 14 days of sowing .
Variation in growth and production can be found because of the differences in climate , size of plants and management .
Actually the requirement of manure depends upon the type of field .
It is appropriate to provide the amount of nitrogen , phosphorous and potash in the ratio 1:1:1 .
The weeds should also be removed .
Regular and adequate supply of water is essential for basil .
It should also be noted that there should be no water logging in the fields otherwise this crop might be damaged .
The harvesting of the crop depends upon its usefulness .
If the farming of basil is done for its leaves and then it should be cut right before it starts flowering .
To obtain the oil of basil it should be harvested when it is laden with flowers .
Generally the crop sown in the month of July-August is obtained in the month of October-November .
Rabi crop can be sown after this .
The major cereal crops of India are wheat , rice , maize , millet and barley .
Wheat is major cereal crop of the world .
It occupies the second position in terms of production in India .
It is primarily used to make Chapatis -LRB- Roti -RRB- .
The use of its straw is significant for the animals .
It is sown in different kinds of soils .
The yield is good in loamy , sandy and black soil .
Wheat is generally grown after maize , millet and barley in Rabi .
The method of growing wheat after rice has begun .
It is essential to put fertilizers in the field for good production .
The produce increases when fertilizers are put 10 cms below the seeds before sowing .
When irrigation facilities are available the fertilizers can be put in large amounts .
Generally it is recommended to put 80-120 kg nitrogen , 40-60 kg phosphorous and 40 kg potash per hectare .
Some scientists believe that potash is adequately found in Indian soil and the use of potash is not needed .
Putting 10-20 kgs of potash is mostly found to be profitable .
The crops of sankar family have the capacity to use more fertilizers .
The yield of these crops is much more than the ordinary crops and thus they exploit more nutrients .
The scarcity of zinc is found in the wheat farms these days .
It is essential to put zinc and other nutrients in the soil after testing .
The scarcity of zinc is found in Uttar Pradesh , Haryana , Punjab and Madhya Pradesh .
Rice is an extremely important crop of India .
The production of rice is the most as compared to other cereals .
The farming of rice is done in all conditions .
In India 25 percent of rice is grown in irrigated condition , 55 percent rice is grown in water logged condition and 20 percent in high yield farm .
Rice has the capacity to absorb nutrients in hybrid and small saturated species .
The require nitrogen , phosphorous , potash and zinc in adequate quantity .
Nitrogen Ammonia was put in the form of sulphate to grow rice in India .
But due to lesser availability of ammonium sulphate , the use of urea fertilizers are increasing now .
Adequate amount of phosphorous is also significant for good production of rice .
For increased production of rice putting potash in the farm is as important as nitrogen and phosphorous .
Among different cereals of the world maize is a significant crop .
Even in India from the point of view of both area and production , maize is a significant crop .
People use maize in the form of Chapati , corn , popcorn , dalia etc .
It is also used as fodder .
It also has an industrial use in the form of starch .
For the good production of maize it is required to put adequate amount of fertilizers .
Barley is am important Rabi crop .
From the point of view of both production and area it occupies second position among Rabi crops .
When the production is more than the use of people it is also fed to the animals , cows and horses .
It is grown in northern Madhya Pradesh , Punjab , Haryana , Himachal Pradesh , Bihar , West Bengal , Jammu & Kashmir , Uttar Pradesh , Gujrat , Maharashtra , Karnataka and Tamilnadu .
In comparison to wheat , barley requires lesser quantities of both manure and fertilizers .
It has the capacity to grow in both alkaline and saline soil .
For both cereals and bait , barley is an important crop in dry-land farming .
From the point of view of production and area Maharashtra , Madhya Pradesh , Karnataka , Andhra Pradesh , Rajasthan , Gujrat , Uttar Pradesh and Tamil nadu are remarkable .
Chapatis are made from millet .
It is also used in the form of fodder .
Millet is grown for both cereal and fodder .
In India , except Assam , millet is grown in all the parts of northern India such as Himachal Pradesh , Uttar Pradesh , Gujrat , Rajasthan , Jammu & Kashmir , Maharashtra and Haryana .
Pulses and oilseeds have their own significance in India .
Pulses are the main course of Indians .
Pulses are the source of protein .
Urad , gram , lentils , peas , pigeon peas , beans are the major pulses .
Oil is obtained from oil seed crops .
There are various uses of oil .
Special efforts are being made for the production of pulses and oil seed crops in India .
Gram is an important pulse crop which includes one-third part of the total pulse crop and 40 percent of the total production in India .
Other than pulses , grams are also used in the form of flour , recipes , vegetables etc .
It is mostly grown in Uttar Pradesh , Rajasthan , Himachal Pradesh and Haryana .
Mostly the farmers do not put fertilizers in gram crops .
This is true that gram is a leguminous crop and it fixes the nitrogen of atmosphere , but when does it hap n ?
When the plants are quite long and they spread their roots .
Phosphorous increases the nitrogen intake capacity of the leguminous crops .
Therefore putting 15 kg nitrogen and 25-45 kg phosphorous is beneficial .
Kidney bean crop is also quite extensive in India .
Kidney bean is grown in most of the areas of Madhya Pradesh , Uttar Pradesh , aharashtra , Punjab , Andhra Pradesh , Karnataka , Tamilnadu and Rajasthan .
Its grains are used in the form of Pulse .
It is grown in all the three seasons Kharif , relay cropping and summer .
Peas are mostly grown in Uttar Pradesh , Madhya Pradesh and Bihar .
Its use is less in the form Pulse but more in the form of vegetables .
Mostly no fertilizers are used for this crop but putting 10-25 to 40-10 fertilizer elements increases its productivity .
Pigeon Peas are used mostly in the form of pulses .
Its green pod is also used in the form of restricted vegetable .
It is particularly produced in Uttar Pradesh , Madhya Pradesh , Haryana , Bihar , Rajasthan , Maharashtra and south India .
Cowpea is grown in both the crops Rabi and Kharif in the form of pulses , fodder , vegetable and green manure .
While growing Rabi crops it is grown in Andhra Pradesh , Karnataka , Tamilnadu and Maharashtra but while growing Kharif crop it is grown in Uttar Pradesh , Madhya Pradesh and other states of north India .
It is also grown with other crops in mixed form .
The farming of lentils is primarily done in northern India , Madhya Pradesh and Maharashtra .
It is used in the form of pulse but green pod is also used in the form of vegetable .
Oil seed crops consist of groundnut , mustard , sesame , linseed , safflower , Redi , sunflower and Ramtil .
The farming of soya bean is also becoming quite popular in Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh .
Despite all this today Indian government has to import oil in large quantities and disburse foreign currency .
Thus it is essential to increase the production of oil seeds through balanced use of fertilizers .
Groundnut has 44-50 percent oil .
Groundnut oil is used in both food and vegetable production .
Groundnut is consumed in both non-fried and fried form .
It has Protein and Vitamins .
Due to the presence of oil and protein in adequate amount it provides lot of energy .
India leads the world in terms of area and production .
Groundnut is mostly grown in Gujarat , Andhra Pradesh , Tamilnadu and Karnataka .
Rye and mustard are among major oil seed crops of India .
They are used for oil , spices and medicines .
Fibers are obtained from the plants of linseed and oil is obtained from its seeds .
It is a drying oil thus it is primarily used for Varnishing , Paint , Linoleum , ` Oil cloth ` ` waterproof fabrics etc .
In India linseed is grown in Uttar Pradesh , Madhya Pradesh , Maharashtra , Bihar , Rajasthan , Karnataka and west Bengal .
Sesame is an ancient oil seed crop from which edible oil is obtained .
It has 46-52 percent of oil .
Its grains are also used in the form of sweets .
It is grown in Andhra Pradesh , Orissa , Madhya Pradesh , Tamilnadu , Rajasthan , Gujarat and Maharashtra .
castor crops are grown for oil .
It contains 35-58 percent of oil .
In terms of area India occupies number one position in the world and in terms of production it is at second position .
Castor oil is used as a lubricant in machines , airplanes , engine etc .
It is also used in soaps , printing ink , varnish , linoleum , plastic , transparent paper , medicines and illumination .
Soyabean is one of the ancient crops of the world .
It is sown in Kharif season .
Its production is increasing in sufficient pace in Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh in India .
Soyabean contains 18-20 percent oil and 40-45 percent protein .
Soyabean is also used in the form of pulse .
Soybean oil is edible .
Cash crops are those that earn substantial benefit on growing .
Some major crops among them are sugarcane , cotton , tobacco etc .
Among cash crops in India , sugarcane is a major crop .
It is the major source of sugar .
In India sugarcane is mostly grown in Uttar Pradesh .
Sugarcane is also grown in sufficient amount in Karnataka , Maharashtra , Andhra Pradesh , Tamil nadu , Madhya Pradesh , Punjab , Bihar , Haryana , Rajasthan and Assam .
Among fibrous crops the most useful crop for the humans is cotton .
In India cotton is grown from the lowland of Himalaya in the north to Kanyakumari in south .
In terms of area , India is at number one position in the world and in terms of production it is at number four .
In India , cotton farming in 75 percent of the area is dependent upon dry land condition that is on the rainy season without irrigation .
Cotton farming is done in mixed form with maize , barley , Ambadi , sesame , pulses and vegetables at several places .
Cotton farming is also done without any fertilizer at several places .
Tobacco has a chief position among the cash crops exported from India .
Tobacco comes after cotton and sugarcane .
Tobacco is used in bidi , cigarette , pipe , cigar etc .
Tobacco farming is often done in all the states of India but remarkable production is in Andhra Pradesh , Gujrat , Tamilnadu , Karnataka , Bihar , West Bengal and Uttar Pradesh .
Generally in India the farming of free tobacco species is done .
It is known as indigenous tobacco .
Rustica species is said to be a overseas tobacco or the tobacco from kolkata .
Since ancient times , spices have been used for various purposes .
It helps in digestion .
It is also used in the form of medicine .
India is the largest producer and exporter of cardamom in the world .
Cardamom farming is done in the hilly forests of western ghats of Kerala and Tamilnadu .
Its farming is either done separately or with coffee and nut .
It is a dry fruit of the crop .
Black pepper is an ancient spice of India .
It is mostly grown in Kerala , Karnataka and Tamilnadu .
This crop is also grown in small quantities in Assam and West Bengal .
Its crop is also grown in Andhra Pradesh and Andaman Islands .
The pepper sold in the markets are juicy fruits of the dried plants .
Two kinds of red chilies are grown in India .
It is used in both green and dried forms .
It makes the food spicy .
It is used in chutney , pickles and medicines .
Three-fourth part of its total production is grown in Andhra Pradesh , Karnataka and Tamilnadu .
The rhizomes of ginger are used .
In India it is grown in Kerala , Karnataka , Tamilnadu , Bihar , West Bengal , Uttar Pradesh , Maharashtra and Himachal Pradesh .
India is the largest producer of ginger in the world .
It is mostly exported .
Turmeric is an important spice .
It is used as a coloring agent , cosmetic and in medicines .
Kumkum is also made of turmeric .
Fruits have their own value .
Fruits contain nutrients in ample amount .
Fruits contain more amount of vitamins and minerals as compared to other edible stuffs .
The nutrients present in the fruits help in digestion .
Vegetables contain adequate amount of nutrients .
Moreover , the use of vegetables enhances the taste of food .
Flowers are also important in their own way .
Other than being beautiful they also provide cosmetic items .
Perfumed products are obtained from the juice of perfumed plants such as rose , Jasmine etc .
These crops shall also be produced now through scientific methods .
Banana is an important plantation crop among fruits .
Banana is grown in substantial amount in Tamilnadu , West Bengal , Kerala , Maharashtra , Gujarat , Karnataka , Assam , Andhra Pradesh and Bihar .
Of all the fruits grown in India , mangoes are grown in half the area .
It grows in all the areas from east to west and north to south .
Citrus is grown in all the states of India but Madhya Pradesh , Madras and Maharashtra covers most of the areas and the production is also highest there .
In India grapes are grown in Punjab , Uttar Pradesh , Himachal Pradesh , Maharashtra , Karnataka , Hyderabad and Tamilnadu .
Guava is the major fruit of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar .
It is also grown in other states such as Madhya Pradesh and south India .
Its fruit contain large amount of vitamin ` C ` .
Papaya is grown in almost the entire country .
In India apple is particularly grown in Punjab , Uttar Pradesh , Himachal Pradesh and Kashmir .
It is grown in small areas of Nilgiri in south .
Green leafy vegetables are significant in human ` s life .
They contain substantial amount of protein .
Green leafy vegetables can easily be grown .
Every individual should consume 284 grams of vegetables everyday .
The vegetable production in our country is less than requirement .
Thus apart from area , per hectare production shall be increased .
Flowers symbolize beauty .
Apart from being used in cosmetics they are also used in worshiping , weddings and all suitable works .
The flower branches , garland chains etc . are also used in abundance .
Apart from this perfumed oil , perfumes , scents are also made from these flowers .
Flowers are also used in temples , mosques , churches , Gurudwaras and all the religious places .
Flowers also add to the glory in gardens and inside homes .
Sentalum Alvum Lin , is the evergreen tree of Sentalacy family .
It is a medium shaped , evergreen , semi parasitic tree .
They are found in the dry regions of south India starting from the Vindhyachal mountain to primarily in Mysore and Tamilnadu almost 1200 m . above the sea level .
Sandalwood trees are grown in some parts of Rajasthan , U.P and Orissa .
The tree barks are red , brown and somewhat black and rough .
The leaves are smooth , oval but sometimes big .
The flowers are multi-colored .
Sandalwood and the oil obtained from it are being used since extremely ancient times .
Its wood has medicinal values .
Its fragrance has special characteristic in the world .
Its fragrance is light and mild .
Sandalwood oil is used on a large scale in the form of perfume .
This oil is used in soaps , cosmetics etc .
Its use is quite less in the aromatic beverages .
Sandalwood on distillation yields aromatic oil .
Today India is the largest exporter of sandalwood oil .
The trees begin to flower in February-April and bear fruits by July to September .
The trees bear some fruits in February and November also .
Sandalwood trees generate seeds in large amount .
Sandalwood plant is a instrumental parasitic root plant .
Generally when the sandalwood seeds are sown then along with them the seeds of nutritional plants are also sown .
They are also sown with teak plants .
Sandalwood are grown every year in about 10-20 hectare land in Tamilnadu .
For this seeds of fresh fruits in October are collected .
They are dried after cleaning and then sown in beds .
The softwood and wood interior of sandalwood are properly cleaned and separated from the stem .
The interior wooden part of Sandalwood trees are most useful and valuable .
The trees are not cut because a lot of oil remains in the roots .
Spike disease is the major among various kinds of diseases that harm Sandalwood .
Spike disease appears in all kinds of plants whether small or big .
Every year this disease destroys almost 50.30 tonnes of sandal worth three lakh rupees .
Spike disease catches the plants through micoplazma .
It was considered to be virus .
Spike disease spreads through the touch of roots and harms by reaching the other plants through insects .
Micoplazma can also be combated through chemicals .
It is estimated that India produces 40,000-50 ,000 tonnes of sandalwood every year .
Majority of its part is obtained from Mysore .
Apart from this , Indore , Ujjain , Mumbai and Kannauj are its chief centers .
Most of the wood is consumed in Uttar Pradesh which is purchased by the Tamilnadu government through auction .
The oil produced in Kanpur and Kannauj is sold at a high rate while the sandalwood of Mysore is expensive .
Such big difference in the price of sandalwood oil is due to the purchase of wood from individuals at a very high rate .
India produces about 30 tonnes of oil .
80 percent of the total sandalwood oil produced in north India was sent to European countries such as France , England , Netherlands , United States of America and Hungary .
Basmati is nature ` s best gift , which is made of two words ` bans ` meaning fragrance and ` mati ` meaning feel , thus the rice that gives the experience of fragrance falls into this category .
Basmati rice is primarily used to make Pulav and Biryani .
Tarawadi Basmati , Basmati-370 and Type 3 are specially popular among the varieties of Basmati class and exported abroad .
Prolonged sun shine , more moisture , appropriate water management and general soil are essential for Basmati variety of farming .
During arboreal growth 25 to 36 degree Celsius of temperature is appropriate .
Thus it is the effect of particular day duration .
Basmati rice is generally put into long and thin category .
In order to get high quality rice , it is essential to harvest the crop at proper time .
Due to immature development because of early harvesting the quality of rice is adversely affected and late harvesting sheds the grains .
Thus , in order to increase the quality of rice low temperature is appropriate at the time of grains growth .
The aromatic varieties are sold at high prices and the profit is also more .
Some aromatic varieties are known for their peculiar aroma and qualities .
In the case of Basmati rice the motto ` old is gold ` is fully characterized .
Increasing the quantity of nitrogen , reduces the percentage of whole rice yield .
It is a variety majorly grown in India ` s north-western states and plains of Pakistan .
The crop gets ready for harvesting within 145 days and the production capacity is 2.5 to 3.5 tonne .
The aromatic varieties grown in Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal are considered to be the best .
The plants grow long and the fibers are long , open and without locks .
Due to its high price in exporting , the farmers and exporter get most of the profit .
The stem of the bonsai variety developed in Hyderabad is strong and its fibers are open .
Generally the farming of Basmati crop is done through sowing .
Because of the less weight of grains , a bag of 15-20 kgs of seeds is sufficient for one hectare of land .
Therefore because of early plantation the crop grows more and there are chances of its withering .
There are relatively less weeds in the longer varieties of Basmati .
After 20 to 40 days of sowing , clean environment is provided to the plants by weeding through hands .
There is demand for Basmati rice both in domestic and foreign markets .
A total of 2 part of aromatic crop is exported in foreign markets .
Actually rice has been exported from India for centuries .
At present there is special demand for Basmati rice in Saudi-Arab , Bahrin , Kuwait , Oman etc .
The Indians residing in foreign also import large amount of Basmati rice from India , thus its demand is steadily increasing in America and Britain .
The share of Basmati in World-business of rice has been 1.75 to 2.53 percent in the last ten years .
India and Pakistan have played significant roles in export .
Jai . lin . is the plant of `` Oliacy `` family .
It is planted in the gardens of India .
This species is sown in abundance in the plains and hills at the height of up to 3000 meters .
It is the chief source of business in Europe and Mediterranean countries .
These plants are grown at large scale in some regions of Uttar Pradesh such as Gazipur , Farrukhabad , Balia and Jaunpur and perfumes are also extracted from the flowers .
These plants flower for 8-15 years once they are planted .
The flowers are mostly used for garlands , bouquets and religious rituals .
They are used in little amount for making hair oils and perfumes .
Jasmine oil is not extracted in India .
In the recent years Jasmine gardens have been implanted in Egypt , Syria , Algeria and Morocco .
Its root is beneficial in treating eczema .
Its leaves are chewed to get relief from skin diseases .
The aromatic oil and perfume because of its cooling effect is used in skin diseases , headache and eye ailments .
The flowers harvested in warm and open sunshine give more fragrance as compared to the flowers harvested in changed and rainy season .
Right after the harvesting their perfumes extraction begins .
The temperature should be lowered as much as possible .
Two types of extraction methods are used in India .
Jasmine oil is used for the preparation of good fragrance .
It is below rose in commercial significance .
It is also put in incense and lamps .
Jasmine plant is small .
It bears many kinds of flowers such as white , yellow etc .
Jasmine requires warm climate warm place even in winters .
They need the fields with sunshine .
Jasmine can be grown from 700 m to 2000 m height in the hills of Kumayun .
This plants lives for 50 years .
But they bear fruits till the age of 15 years .
They can be grown in different kinds of climate .
Jasmine can be grown very easily into an irrigation less area also .
It is also grown in Rajasthan , Tamilnadu and other states .
Red soil is most suitable for this .
Jasmine farm should have proper drainage system .
Jasmine plants can be grown anytime between June to December .
For the good growth of plants it is essential to provide manures and fertilizers .
The plants start bearing flowers from the next year .
The flowers can be seen in the month of April-May and August-November .
The jasmine flower is plucked very early in the morning .
The fragrance is at its peak during this time .
The oil content reduces after ten .
The plants are trimmed every year .
It is also essential to discard the dried stems .
Weeding is done after every two weeks to remove the weeds .
The flowers can be pluck anytime between March to October .
The flower production depends upon the up-keeping of plants .
There are two major insects that harm the jasmine plants-bud worm insects and red mite .
Folydol and sulphur are used together to control these insects .
This medicine shall be put after every fifteen days .
Amomum Subulatus Raksverg -LRB- black cardamom -RRB- is a cotyledonous plant of the `` gingiviresi `` family .
Its plant is herbaceous , long and evergreen .
Sikkim is the biggest black cardamom producing region and it produces cardamom in highest amount .
Then after is the major places of upper Himalayan region of West Bengal and Assam .
On an average the black cardamom has 70 percent seeds and 30 percent fruit cover .
The quality of the seeds of black cardamom is similar to that of the seeds of green cardamom .
If the forest land is chosen for the farming of black cardamom , it shall be completely cleaned .
The land should not have any kind of weed .
The black cardamom fruits of saavani variety get fit to be plucked by August-September .
The fruits of Ramsai and Golshahi variety of plants are big and become fit to be plucked by October-November .
Ramsai , Saavni and Golsai are three major varieties in Sikkim whose farming is done .
A virus named farki attacks black cardamom and make the plant diseased .
Due to this disease the plants bear less fruits .
The diseased plants shall be destroyed by burning .
Rats and other wild animals eat the raw fruits of back cardamom and harm the crop .
India is a agriculture dominant country where 70 percent of the population depends upon farming .
India has good number of animal resources but the production of animal produce is very less than their number .
The major reason behind this is that less attention is paid towards fodder production .
Due to increase in population most of the land is engaged in grain production .
Apart from this the farmers are paying attention towards the cash crops such as sugarcane , cotton , tobacco , oil seeds etc .
Generally the animals are fed with the hay and the left overs of the crop .
It reduces the production of milk and other animal products .
The animals roam around here and there and also harm the natural farms .
4.4 percent of the agricultural land is engaged in fodder production .
Generally the land which is not fit for agriculture itself grows fodder in the monsoon season .
As a result of research , different varieties of fodder grass and food grain fodder and leguminous crops are evolved .
The agricultural scientists say that the decrease in temperature shall not only lead to increased wheat production .
But is also beneficial for thick grains , pulses and oil seeds .
It seems to compensate the harm made to the kharif crops .
According to the Agriculture ministry in the current Rabi season , by Friday , sowing has been done in 567 hectares of land .
Which is 7 lakh hectares more as compared to last year .
The sowing of approximately 59.14 lakh hectare of thick grains , 136.05 lakh hectare of pulses and 81 lakh hectare of oil seeds has been completed .
It is expected that the total sowing of Rabi crop might be more than the last year .
The central government with incomplete arrangements has initiated to give subsidy in cash from Tuesday .
Under this the government has started this plan with just seven schemes in 20 districts of the country from January 1 , 2013 .
The government under this scheme has yet not included the subsidy on kerosene , diesel , grain and manure .
The major cause of not initiating despite full arrangements is the in completion of the structure of banks .
Forget about the entire country , among those 43 districts where the cash payment was supposed to begin , UID -LRB- UNIQUE IDENTIFICATION -RRB- has reached only 20 districts .
In such a situation the government is saying to implement the scheme in all the 43 districts from March ,2013 only .
Actually , Congress is stunned with the negative publicity of the scheme started with incomplete arrangements .
Major opposition party BJP has impinged the government for this and Raman government of Chattisgarh has strongly opposed it .
Congress said that this plan directly benefiting the poor will put an end to corruption and Intermediaries practice .
BJP does not want the welfare of the people that is why it is opposing it .
While BJP says that Cash subsidy will spoil the game of Congress .
Understand with an example , a farmer sells peas at 5 rupees per kg and through the intermediaries it is sold to the consumers at 25 rupees per kg .
What if there are no intermediaries .
It is beginning in Mumbai from 25th January .
State agriculture marketing board has made such a system with which the farmers can directly send the vegetables to housing societies .
It will begin with the government colonies .
Apart from this , the board shall very soon initiate dial-e-vegetable service .
With this the customers can place order for the vegetables through phone .
Now with this new system , when the farmer will directly sell his crop to the consumers , it is possible that the rate of the vegetables shall reduce by 10 to 20 percent .
Maharashtra will be the first state to start such a service .
The central government fulfilling its promise on Tuesday initiated subsidy transfer plan .
It includes schemes such as post matric fellowship scheme for the SC categories and Indira Gandhi maternity assistance scheme .
As of now cooking gas , kerosene , manure and food grains has not been included in this .
In the beginning the subsidy of only seven banks shall be put in bank accounts , then gradually the rest of the schemes shall be included .
By the end of 2013 the subsidy amount of all the chosen schemes of the districts of the country shall directly be deposited into bank accounts .
Despite the center ` s UPA government saying `` your money in your hand `` to be a game changer , but after knowing the ground reality the central rural development minister Jairam Ramesh believes that it is not a magical stick .
Jairam Ramesh who came for initiating DBT system related to subsidy transfer in the eastern Godavari district of Andhra Pradesh said that it is a delivery system it will always require reform .
The special thing about Sunday ` s program was that it was associated to MANREGA in the form of pilot project .
Jairam said that it shall be implemented in the entire country by August , 2013 .
During the ceremony the sample was presented not only in the account of the beneficiary but also the cash was handed personally through micro ATM .
It has also proved unique in the case of public distribution system -LRB- PDS -RRB- .
According to Jairam this system will help in fighting back corruption .
Andhra Pradesh ` s chief minister Kiran kumar reddy and other members of his cabinet were present in the ceremony .
Reddy said that by the end of this year all the 34 schemes of the state shall be linked with this .
The central government has started the DBT system from 1st January .
Under this the money of government ` s welfare scheme shall directly be transferred into the accounts of approximately two lakh people of 20 districts .
The commission ` s member Abhijit sen has made responsible the mismanagement of the food system for the price rise .
Abhijit sen says that in the recent years the prices of the food grains has increased the most .
The reason behind this is not the lack of production but the mismanagement of food system .
The government does not have any long term policy with which the farmers can get the guarantee of the appropriate amount of their produce .
He said that the food system of the country is inefficient in formulating any such policy .
Giving examples of the huge reserves of wheat , he said that the government is not willing to sell it at the right price .
The condition is this that the warehouses do not have the place to keep it and new crop will arrive in few months .
Planning commission ` s member Sen said that , there is a lot of fluctuation in prices in the world market today .
Therefore we need to make our rates more flexible .
With the change in prices at the world level , there should also be changes at the domestic level .
The changes in the price require continuous monitoring but there is no monitoring in the country .
Commission for agricultural cost and prices -LRB- CACP -RRB- , must play an important role in determining the price rates .
