Amongst the able disciples of saintly musician Pandit Vishnu Digambar Paluskar , the name Pandit Omkar Nath thakur is called with respect .
The swear that Pandit Vishnu Digambar had taken up to raise the level of music and musicians was definitely fulfilled by his disciple Pandit Omkar Nath .
The coordination of musical art and theory is rarely found in a musician .
It is observed that the artists of high standards neglect theories and the theorists are seen to disdain music .
Consequently the gap between music and art kept on increasing day by day but as opposed to this Pandit Jee set an ideal .
Since the beginning the voice of Pandit jee was very sweet .
Since childhood he loved music .
He was always eager to learn and hear music and was ready to suffer every kind of problems for this .
After the death of his father Pandit jee got worried about his future .
During the same time he got the opportunity to sing before a liberal businessman Shapurjee Macherjee Dungajee .
Seth jee could see some spectacular talent in his singing .
Therefore a Parsee Seth suggested Pandit Balkrishna , the elder brother of Pandit jee that boy Omkar Nath should be sent to Mumbai to learn music from Pandit Vishnu Digambar .
He was sent to Pandit Vishnu Digambar to learn music .
In an aspiration to be a musician he came to Pandit Vishnu Digambar .
After getting musical education for about 6-7 years in 1916 he was sent to Lahore as the principal of Gandharva College where he fulfilled his responsibility with hard work and devotion .
After spending the rigorous student life at master ` s house he came back home .
During that time non cooperation movement was on move against the British empire in which he actively participated .
In June 1922 he was married to Indira Devi of Surat .
He went to Nepal with a hope to get honor and money from the king of Nepal .
He had to face many difficulties on way but he did not stop .
The king of Nepal was touched by his singing and gave him 5 thousand rupees in Prize .
Apart from Nepal he also visited countries like Italy , France , Germany , Belgium , Switzerland and England and wherever he went he raised the head of Indian music .
In 1952 he was sent to Afghanistan by the Indian government where he lead the Indian cultural committee .
He represented India in the world peace council held in Budapest -LRB- 1953 -RRB- and Germany -LRB- 1954 -RRB- .
Along with art he also paid good attention to theories of art .
In 1938 the first volume of Sangeetanjali was published where light was thrown both on the operational and art aspect .
So far its 6 volumes have been published .
Apart from this series he has written a book named `` Pranav Bharti `` where riddles of theories have been untangled .
He has followed his self written vowel script in Sangeetanjali .
In 1950 a Music College with the name `` Shree Kala Sangeet Bharti `` was established in Benaras Hindu University and Pandit jee was given the post of its chairman .
Pandit jee belonged to the Gwalior tradition of singing .
Khayal singing is the specialty of this tradition .
Despite being the singer of Khayal tradition Pandit jee successfully presented Dhrupad and Thumri .
Because of the presence of eroticism in Thumri , Pandit jee adopted the new style of singing Bhajan in the manner of Thumri .
There was complete coordination in the yodel , tone , solfa etc . of Pandit jee .
Hearing his eloquent singing interested listeners are also seen to shed tears .
The present Hindustani Sangeet is owes Amir Khusro .
He has played a significant role in giving a modern look to the music .
He was born in a placed named Patiyali in the Eta district of Uttar Pradesh in 1253 .
Amir Khusro is a person of sharp brain .
After the death of his father he got the patronage of the then king of Gulam clan .
There he developed special interest for literature and music .
Finally after working in many states he went to Alauddin Khilji .
Alauddin was a incomparable lover of music .
Alauddin became very happy to get Amir Khusro and made him the royal singer .
It is said that since childhood Khusro sang poems and everyday made Alauddin Khilji hear new poems .
Apart from him there were many poets in the court of Alauddin amongst whom Khusro received the highest place .
Khusro had true assay of the intellect of Gopal Nayak .
Amir Khusro read the then public interest and accordingly created new instruments .
Not only this , he only gets the credit of originating `` Chhota khayal `` , the popular song of modern period .
According to some scholars all three `` Chhota khayal `` , `` Kawwali `` and `` Tarana `` were invented by him .
It is said that instead of four strings he put three strings in southern Veena and named it Sehtaar .
Sehtaar gradually became Sitar .
Amir Khusro is also known as the creator of tabor .
Amir Khusro has sound knowledge of many languages .
It is said that he wrote a total of 19 Persian and music books out of which 22 are available .
His master Nizamuddin aulia passed away in 1324 because of which he was in deep grief .
Khan Sahib was born in 1855 in a musician ` s family of the then province of Udaipur in a place named Uniyara .
It is said that previously his name was Gulam Ahmad but later he was naed Alladiya Khan .
His elder brother was Haider Khan who was an accomplished singer .
He believed that error keeps increasing when a wrong person gets a right kind of skill .
He had prepared many records of Adana , Malshree , Shuddh Kalyan , Purvi , Maand etc . in his youth .
Khan Sahib abstained from any kind of addiction .
He was very punctual .
He did every work of the daily routine on right time .
He was not in favor of bookish knowledge in music .
He said that one does not learn music merely by getting bookish knowledge .
Music should be such that make the listeners happy that is why Khan Sahib always used to say `` Sing , play , allure . .
Khan Sahib always wore a particular kind of outfit .
He always wore white shirt , long black Parsee coat , white wrap around , colorful silk turban , pump shoes in feet and a stick with a silver tip in hands .
He stayed in Mumbai till his last time and passed away on 16th March , 1946 .
Khan Sahib quite liked obsolete tunes .
Therefore the presence of Khan Sahib in every high level musical conference was considered to be essential .
He mostly used falling tones .
Every music lover is familiar to Ustaad Amir Khan , the ex representative of Kirana tradition .
He also became favorite among common listeners by playback singing in Baiju Bawra and Jhanak Jhanak Payal Baje movie .
Ustad Amir Khan thought that classical music can be sufficiently propagated therefore he did not leave the opportunity to sing in any of the movie .
Khan Sahib Amir Khan was born in the month of April in 1912 in Akola .
musicians like Alabande Jafaruddin Khan , Bindu Khan , Murad Khan etc often came to his house and discussed music .
Though Amir Khan was very young at that time but he was affected by that environment .
There used to be great musical gathering at his place every Friday .
Where Murad Khan Binakar , Vaheed Khan and Rajjab ali Khan always used to participate .
This musical environment put an indelible effect on Amir Khan .
In the beginning Amir Khan was taught playing violin by Shahneer Khan and for some days he kept playing violin .
Ameer khan was taught singing and he imbibed various kinds of tunes .
It was kept confidential by Shahmeer Khan .
People welcomed the performance of little kid of 11-12 years of age on stage with applause .
Amir Khan started singing .
While he was singing tough tune he suddenly stopped and started sweating .
The listeners present there also appreciated his melodious and sweet style .
Since then Amir Khan left playing violin forever and started practicing singing .
Shahmeer Khan had wonderfully set the tunes of music in Amir Khan ` s throat .
Amir Khan transmitted his first radio program from Kolkata .
After staying for 6 years in kolkata he permanently settled in Mumbai .
Despite being deep like an ocean Amir Khan ` s singing style was melodious .
Khan Sahib ` s affection for tunes was original .
His singing style was tranquil and serious like his behavior .
There was a special increase in voice of yodel which is called `` Khandmeru `` method .
I this method as per mathematics the tones are jumbled therefore Amir Khan took a lot of time to reach the peak of mid-seventh in the increment of yodel in ragas like Darbari Kanra or Miya Malhar .
Therefore his singing did not remain fit for common listeners .
He very much liked the adagio `` Jhumra `` rhythm .
He did not like any kind of alterations with the song .
He liked simple rhythmic tune .
Khan Sahib did not like to sing `` Thumri `` nor did he like other light songs .
In 1967 he was awarded by Music theater Academy and in 1971 the Indian government ornamented him with PadmaBhushan .
his singing was very influential whose influence could be seen in the singing of the then youngsters .
The music world owes to Abdul Kareem Khan .
He prepared many top level artists .
He only made easy and popularized Thumri .
He had equal expertise in Khyal , Thumri , Bhajan and Marathi tonal songs .
Because of his true efforts almost all the singers have started liking to sing `` Thumri `` .
It is sometimes seen that the public itself demands for Thumri .
Khan Sahib lived in Kirana village of Saharanpur district .
Khan Sahib had become a singer of top level but he heartily wanted to develop good musicians and listeners .
Therefore he established a music school in Pune in around 1913 .
It was named `` Arya musical school `` .
Few days later he opened a branch of this school in Mumbai and himself started staying in Mumbai .
He had to shut this school for some reason after around three years and consequently he left Mumbai and started living in Miraj .
From Miraj once he had to go to Madras for a music program .
Khan Sahib was a lean and thin person .
He was a calm and soft spoken person .
His behavior was as sweet as his singing .
He was very proficient in singing Thumri .
Some records of Thumri are always transmitted through radio which is very sweet and attractive .
It is a commendable thing when a person born in the environment of Karnatik music gets an expertise in north Indian music .
He was appointed as the signal inspector in Nizam Railway at the age of 16 years but his desire to learn music kept increasing day by day .
He was very fond of the singing of Ustad Amir Khan therefore he became a disciple of Amir Khan .
He opened a shop for earning livelihood .
He remained busy in business for the entire day and practiced music at night .
Shree Kanan laid more emphasis on his affection with voice , melody and expression .
Amir Khan Sahib ` s echo was very much evident in his delayed tone and increase in voice .
Shree Kanan was very simple and mingling person , he heartily respected every artist whether big or small .
He just loved humans .
His heart melted for them whom he saw were in trouble and was ready to help them instantly .
The famous musician of the music world sang the folk songs , devotional songs , gazals etc with interest and tactics as he sung classical music .
It seemed as if he was an expert in whatever he sung .
His father ` s name was Sidhdhram Swami who was the lover and scholar of music .
Different people have different singing style and boy Kumar sung exactly the same .
At one time he sang the songs of late Abdul Kareem Khan and right after he sang songs of late Faiyaz Khan .
He did not face any kind of difficulty in such kind of changes .
People were amazed to see the talent of a young child like him .
Everywhere there were clamors of `` Kumar .
According to him , the bliss that folk songs have does not exist in any other music .
Further expressing his views he said that a true singer is one whose songs are liked by every listener whether he is discern or not .
music is a different thing its grammar is different .
Grammar does not make music , music is one which has pigmentation .
Classical music needs both melody and brain .
Those who lack brains should not sing classical but devotional songs .
Classical music is a devotion .
The open affection with voice makes `` Kumar ` s `` personality explicit .
Amongst the Muslim musicians Ustad Alauddin Khan was the only person who had to face many difficulties in receiving music knowledge but he imparted knowledge to his disciples with ease and generosity .
Ustaad Alauddin was born in Shivpur village , Tripura in 1870 .
His father ` s name was Sadhu Khan and his mother ` s name was Madaar Khan .
He used to play sitar and he learned it from Kasim ali Khan .
When Sadhu khan used to play Sitar , boy Alauddin used to sit near him and carefully listen and himself started humming anything .
During the same time the Nawab had Rampur had returned from abroad after getting higher education .
In abroad he was highly influenced by orchestration , therefore he prepared an orchestra where highly efficient musicians were appointed .
Thus he collected the storehouse of his songs and instruments .
Few days later he was relieved from the estates job because of old age .
Apart from this Ustaad Alauddin taught many with generosity .
Till the last breath of his life he remained busy in music devotion and education .
Which music lover wouldn ` t be familiar with the Sarod playing of Ustad Ali Akbar Khan .
It seems that there was a breeze that put off the lassitude of the brain and the heart became pious .
He just had a sarod , a watch in hand and just two rupees with him but he had no complains .
Anyhow he wanted to to get riddance off his home .
He sat in the train for Khandwa .
He was disappointingly roaming at the station without eating anything and suddenly met a music lover gentleman .
Alauddin Khan was appointed in Maihar court .
Few days later Uday shankar was appointed in dance troop .
Late Karamat Ullah Khan was considered to be a great Sarod player of his times .
NiyamatUllah had two major disciples - Firstly his son Karaamat Ullah and secondly Asad Ulla Khan .
Karaamat Ullah Khan was more interested in teaching his disciples than the expertise in his art .
Ustad Karaamat Ullah Khan died during around 1935 .
Kolkata ` s late Radhika mohan is counted amongst good Sarod players of the country .
Radhika Mohan moitra passed his M. A , L.L.B examinations from Kolkata University and taught in a local college for some time but left it after few days .
Rampur ` s Wazeer Khan has a significanr role in Music world .
He was the popular musician of his times .
Wazeer Khan was born in 1860 .
His father ` s name was Amir Khan who was a popular flutist of his times .
Amir khan was appointed in the court of Rampur ` s Nawab Kalbe ali Khan and he remembered thousands of Dhrupads .
Wazeer Khan learned many kinds of Dhrupadas and lute playing .
Later he learned from Rampur ` s Haidar ali for for few days .
He became the disciple of Nisar ali in Kashi and progressed a lot under his teaching .
After his death he left Kashi and moved to Kolkata .
Amongst the three sons of Wazeer Khan Pyare Khan became a good musician .
When Ustad Hafiz Ali Khan of Gwalior had grown quite old he stopped playing Sarod in any musical gathering but those who have ever heard his melodious tunes can never forget him .
He did not play any raga for a long time but in that period only he presented the summary of the raga in such a way that the listener became lost in the series if melodious songs .
While playing he moved to another raga in such a way that listeners were amazed and the melody of his art kept increasing .
He only presented the chosen melodious notes of the ragas and did not waste his and his listeners time in useless notes .
The selection of the ragas was also done from among the popular ragas .
Ustaad Hafiz Ali was born in a music family in Gwalior in 1887 .
He gave music education to Hafiz ali since childhood .
Hafiz Ali ` s knowledge of tunes had become good therefore he very soon became a good Sarod player in Wazeer Khan ` s shelter .
In the meanwhile he was invited in radio , music parties and music gatherings and he gave his performance .
Around 10 o ` clock he sat for practice and spent entire night playing instrument .
He was also chosen as the fellow of Music Academy , Delhi .
Smt . Sharan Rani is the first woman who has an expertise in a difficult instrument like Sarod .
She also received gold medals at many places .
For further studies the Music theater Academy gave her scholarship for two years .
She has broadcasted her program under radio program .
sharn Rani collected rare instruments from various places and presented it to National museum on 14th July , 1980 .
It has historical significance of many instruments .
Hopefully the research scholars will be benefited from this .
Therefore this work of him is a big contribution for the music lovers and researchers .
The name of Ustaad Halim Jafar is taken with respect among the honorable sitar players of India .
His father ` s name was Jaafar Khan who was well informed of Sitar and a person of religious instinct .
Jafar Sahib propagated a new style different from Maseetkhani and Razakhani which was called Jafarkhani baaz by him .
Here there was more use of hands and less use of mute .
The use of mute is also different from other Sitar players .
The entire Bandish is played in the speed with which Jhala is played .
In the process of playing instrument somewhere there is the feel of lute and Sarod .
Late Ustaad Ashiq ali Khan was not only a good Sitar player but a good singer also .
He received primary music education from his uncle Late Waris Ali Khan .
After setting a concrete base of music he started learning Sitar from Amritsen of Jaipur .
The background of music was set therefore he soon became an efficient Sitar player .
The birth place of Ustaad Ashiq Ali Khan is Varanasi only .
For few years he was appointed in Patiala and Mysore provinces .
Ashiq Ali Khan was a good singer as well , hence there was a put of singing primarily in the alaaps and todas of his instrument playing .
Late Ustaad Inayat Khan ` s place is matchless in the development and propagation of Sitar .
Sitar playing has been the tradition of his family .
His father late Imdad Khan was a good sitar player and son Vilayat Khan was counted among the best instrument players of modern times .
sitar and Surbahar was so much propagated by Inyat Khan in Kolkata that Surbahar and Sitar was started playing at every home .
Despite being from the traditional system Inayat Khan kept adopting experimental perspective to the increase the colors .
While playing he beautifully used the logical tunes in such a way that the listeners were mesmerized .
Khan Sahib late Inayat Khan was born in Itawa on 16th June , 1895 .
He learned Sitar from his father late Imdad Khan .
He went to Kolkata after staying with his brother Waheed Khan in Indore where he was highly honored .
Since 1924 he permanently settled in Gauripur .
In 1924 popular sitar player Vilayat Khan was born there .
Music world suffered an irreparable loss because of his death .
Imdad Khan was born in around 1848 .
His father ` s name was Sahabdad Khan .
Imdad Khan had two brothers - he himself and Karimdad Khan .
Imdad Khan first learned singing from his father .
He started playing Veena and sitar since the age of 21 years .
He investigated many new disciplines in sitar playing and coordinated the Tabla-Pakhawaj co-ordination of Benaras in his own style .
He emphasized on singing all the seven tunes on a single screen .
Imdad Khan did not like nay kind of obstacles while music devotion .
The people of Bengal were quite influenced by the Sitar of Imdad Khan .
After the death of King Tagore Imdad Khan with his entire family started living at Tara Prasad Ghosh ` s house .
After few days he was appointed in the estate of Indore and stayed there for the rest of his life .
Shree Nikhil Banerjee had been the leading name amongst the modern Sitar players .
He was unmatchable in doing aalap addition , tune breaks , preparation etc . in delayed tone .
During his lifetime he broadcasted his program from every center of radio and transmitted sitar playing through all India Radio program .
Several times he went on foreign tour cultural committee and wherever he went he raised the prestige of Indian music .
Pandit Ravishankar has the same place for propagating Indian classical music in foreign which great men like Mahatma Budhha , Swami Vevekanand , Ramteerth have to propagate Indian culture in foreign .
Internationally renowned artist Pandit Ravishankar was born on 7th April 1920 in Varanasi .
His father ` s name was Dr . Shyam shankar who was a well learned person of his times .
He received the degree of barrister from England and doctorate in political science from Geneva University .
He was also a well learned person of Sanskrit .
For some days he worked as the teacher of philosophy in the University of California .
Pandit Ravishankar was born in such a well cultured environment .
He stopped dancing from 1938 and went to Alauddin Khan in Maihar to learn Sitar .
With great devotion , hardwork and dedication in learned music under Pandit Alauddin Khan and alauddin Khan taught him like a son .
With the combination of gold and borax one more artist gem was born .
Alaudding Khan taught Surbahar to his daughter Annapurna who soon became a skilled musician .
Khan Sahib got Annapurna and Ravi married in 1941 .
Pandit Ravishankar raised the level of Indian orchestra and made it prosperous .
The music of the movie `` Andhiya `` has become quite popular .
He gave music programs for free in order to promote Indian music .
He himself gave speech in French and English and if required the the bilingual translated in other languages .
Instead of playing a single raga for longer duration he brought variation in three-four raga nad styles in a every program .
Pandit jee is a simple , soft spoken and mingling person by nature .
He welcomes every elder and young person with love .
One doesn ` t feels like they are talking to a internationally recognized artist .
While at one side there is the seriousness of sea in the sitar playing of of Pandit Ravishankar at the other side there is nimbleness of a drainage gutter .
Complete control over rhythm and tune along with notes is the work of an artist like Pandit Ravishankar .
In the beginning an elaborate Prelusion and addition is presented in the raga after which he takes small breaks in the beginning of Maseetkhani gata whose length gradually increases .
The style of meeting its primary place , tune and verse is his peculiar specialty .
Pandit Ravishankar has a big contribution in propagating southern music in North India .
The different uses of Jhalas is very different .
He was awarded with Padmabhushan in the year 1981 .
He was nominated as the member of Rajya Sabha in 1986 .
Ustaad Vilayat Khan was born in the then Gauripur state of modern Bangladesh in 1926 .
Since a boy was born in the home after a long time he was brought up with great affection .
Every kind of problem is resolved as the cloud of misfortune breaks .
He had to go to Delhi from Kolkata with his mother .
Sometimes he had to uselessly roam in the streets of old Delhi and sometimes had to sleep without any food .
The biggest problem was of an able master .
Under the supervision of his mother and maternal grandfather he immensely practiced Sitar and remained engrossed in it for the entire day .
He also received the `` temporary-Antara `` of some khayals from late Ustaad Faiyaz Khan .
After roaming here and there in Delhi for some days he somehow got a job in All India radio , Delhi .
He started getting invitation from good music gatherings of India and he dazzled the eyes of the listeners with his sitar performance in all the music gatherings whether in Allahabad , Bombay or Kolkata .
In 1952 he raised the head of India with his sitar performance in countries like Eastern Africa , Southern Africa , France , Italy , England , Spain , Switzerland , Russia , Burma etc .
Khan Sahib liked more of singing than tactics .
Amongst the seven strings he considered one string to be the Gandhar voice of the raga that is played .
The resonance of the strings of sitar It helps in creating tones .
Thus the listeners also got the rejoice of singing .
Khan Sahib wanted to stay away from self propaganda .
He himself looked after his motor .
Khan Sahib also liked perfume betel .
Before sitting on the stage he made his mood by putting various kinds of perfumes and betel in mouth .
Thus a great reformer and devotee of Music passed away in 1999 at the age of 80 years .
Joshi Jee was not only a successful Bella Maestro but a good singer as well .
After the death of his father he learned singing from his father ` s guru late Pandit Balkrishna Bua , later from Alladiya Khan and then from his son Bhurji Khan .
for many years he worked as a music director in the Bombay center of all India radio .
Joshi jee was simple , mingling and serious by nature .
It is very difficult of a Hindustani musician to precisely sing and play Karnatik music and for a Karnatik musician to precisely sing and play Hindustani music .
somewhere or another the secret gets revealed but Gopal Krishnan is an exception .
Though Gopal Krishnan is very simple and soft spoken but his movements on violin is very difficult .
Whenever he goes to big music meetings , he wears Karnatik dhoti , shirt and slippers .
It doesn ` t seems as if we are before such a popular artist .
All the time he is engaged in this practice .
The `` gatkari `` aspect on violin was initiated by late Gagan Chandra Chatterjee of allahabad who was popular as Gagan Babu .
Before this , this instrument was considered useful only for singing but Gagan Babu proved it that `` Gatkari `` is much more complete and melodious than singing .
Gagan Babu was born in 1890 in Allahabad .
After few days he started playing violin .
Some stereotype artists did not welcome `` Gatkari `` thing on violin and majority of them considered it to be a big event in the history of music .
Shree Joi Srivastava is a respected name among the major disciples of Gagan Babu .
His parents lovingly called him Joi .
The name became so popular that rarely anybody knew his real name .
He was the youngest of five brothers .
He taught his disciples with great love .
After working for about 35 years in all India radio he learned violin in Gandharva College for few years .
The famous fiddle player of India Prof . V. G . Jog is not only a good fiddle player but also a good musician .
Thenafter he learned the technical things from Vigyaneshwar shastri of Karnatik method .
After this Jog Sahib became so expert that he started getting invitations in music meetings .
After that he taught music to the students under Guru-shishya tradition run by Indian tobacco Kolkata company .
Prof Jog ` s playing style is based on singing .
He also enjoyed Thumri after playing delayed and Dhrut khyal .
Jog Sahib was a simple and soft spoken person .
The Jog Sahib ` s work regarding the propagation of violin in North India has been commendable .
Amongst the current fiddle players Shri D . K. Datar is a remarkable name .
The coordination of fingers on violin is done like Sarangi and sometimes it seems Sarangi is being played .
Very soon he started performing in all India radio and music gatherings .
The delight increases with Thumri play at the last of his playing .
Smt . Shishir Kanadhar Chaudhri is the first Indian woman who has earned national acclaim on such a tough instrument like violin .
Shri chaudhri had huge contribution in the devotion of his wife ` s music .
He keeps attending music gatherings with his wife leaving his business .
Smt . Shishir was born in Shillong .
Shishir Kana was helped a lot in moving ahead due to natural inclination and environment at home .
After learning from Jog Sahib for few days she went to learn from Ustaad Ali akbr Khan .
Before this in 1954 he won an award worth thousand rupees by winning the Tansen Vishnu digambar competition in Kolkata .
It was a big amount then .
Smt . shishir gives her performance with great courage before thousands of viewers .
There is a clear picture of `` tactics `` in his playing .
She ends Drut gata by singing couplets and playing different kinds of instruments .
Late Sridhar Parsekar is named among the modern fiddle players of India .
He worked in all India radio for ten years and learned violin from Joshi jee .
Thus he did both the things .
Despite busy life he devoted more and more time to music .
He kept practicing while giving music direction for movies .
The clarity and preparation of tunes were special but he used to focus less on mid and copula .
He emphasized on ordinary coordination of fingers .
He also struggled with his health .
He never hesitated in playing violin with any of the tabor player .
Apart from qualifying MSc B.T , Lucknow ` s Shree G . N. Goswami also became a high level violin player .
His father ` s name was Kedarnath goswami .
Khan Sahib was a person of old tradition and ideologies .
Therefore he was discouraged to play it .
He himself practiced at home .
Whatever he learned , he played on violin .
Goswami jee has broadcasted his violin viol play from all the radio centers of India .
Singing is seen in delayed and mid tone and tactics in Drut tone .
The Prelusion before the last voice is dominated by tactics that is it has Prelusion and addition .
It has proper place for mid and copula .
He got PhD degree in Music from Rabibdra bharti University , Kolkata .
Apart from being a good violin player , Pandit G . N. Goswami was a good writer and a thinker .
his succinct writings were published from time to time .
Smt . Dr. N . Rajam is an ideal well read woman musician who is not only an expert in music but also skilled in Karnatik music .
He has equal rights on both northern and southern music .
He was born in 1938 in a musician ` s family .
His father , Shree A . Narayan ayyar was a good violin player .
Thus for him it was natural to incline towards this instrument since childhood and his father taught him music since when he was five years old .
The beginning was done through Karnatik music but very soon he started playing `` Varnam `` .
After few years tough struggle she also started broadcasting her program on Madras radio .
After getting music education form her adorable father she started learning music from Shree Musiri Surramanyam , the then principal of Central College of Karnatik Music .
While she was learning Karnatik music she got curious to learn northern music .
Fortunately during that time Shree L . R. Kelkar was in Madras .
Smt . Rajam took the benefit of this opportunity and started learning northern music from Pandit Kelkar .
She passed M . A . in Sanskrit from B.H.U and music proficiency from Prayag music committee .
she received Phd degree from B . H . U .
The topic of the research was comparative study of Hindustani and Karnatik methods of Indian classical music .
Smt . Rajam was fond of late Pandit Omkar nath Thakur ` s singing .
Since when she started trying to get proficiency in Hindustani music she also started trying to play Pandit Omkar nath ` s singing style on violin .
Fortunately Pandit jee met Smt . Rajam and he agreed to make her his student .
Smt . Rajam was happy to get the musician of her dreams .
In 1956 Smt . Rajam was appointed as a lecturer in college of music and fine arts , BHU .
There was a clear presence of Pandit Omkar nath ` s style in her playing .
she had broadcasted her program many times under all India program .
There is a good use of Kakuk in her playing .
We pray for the happiness of Rajam family .
There has been a tradition of playing clarinet since three generations in the clan of late Nandlal , Varanasi ` s famous clarinettist .
After learning from father for few days he started learning from the late Chhote Khan , the clarinettist of Delhi .
Every auspicious occasion begins with Bismillah khan ` s clarinet play .
The use of loud speaker in the age of science has become very easy .
It is a cheap and good medium of propagation for the common masses .
Ustaad Bismillah khan ` s many records and casettes have been made to play on radio .
They are superior from both art and melody point of view .
Ustaad bismillah Khan has proved that the level and melody of clarinet is no less than any other instrument .
all this is the fruit of Khan Sahib ` s efforts .
Ustaad Bismillah Khan was born in 1908 in the Bhojpur district of Varanasi .
His father ` s name was late Paigambar Bakhsh who was a good clarinettist of his times .
He started teaching both singing and clarinet .
Wherever he went he went with his brother and entertained the listeners .
The real name of Bismillah Khan Sahib is Amruddin Khan .
He has made India proud in abroad .
The discerning listeners speak out Bismillah Khan as they listen him .
Khan Sahib is busy in propagating clarinet and teaches his students with great love .
It seems as he is himself singing when we hear the tunes of clarinet .
Nothing can be more bad that the Hindu artists did nothing to cooperate in saving the Hindu tradition which was secured by the Muslim artists .
In 1951 the dance Guru Uday shankar appointed the the music director of his troup .
In 1957 he held the the position of the Principal of Gandhi music college but music maestro Pandit Omkar Nath thakur gave him the the post of reader in the Music college of Benaras Hindu University .
Sitar is the result of ancient three string lute and tabor is the result of natural development of ancient Pushkar trio .
Modern Sarod and medieval Sursingar and rabab are developed versions of ancient Chitra lute .
Dr. Lalmani Mishra was among those retro flex individuals of music who was considered to be a good artist as well as a scholar .
Thus he was dedicated to the service of music but on 5th May , 1980 after a little illness he passed away .
In the present time the credit of raising the level of flute goes to late Pannalal Ghosh .
He was born in 1911 in the varisal village of eastern Bengal -LRB- Bangladesh -RRB- .
His father ` s name was late Akshay Kumar Ghosh who was a lover of music and played sitar .
Late Pannalal started playing flute from the age of 14 years .
He started playing good since he was a musical .
There was a strong desire to learn music thus he happily imbibed everything whatever he got .
He has presented his flute play from every center of radio and under many all India programs of radio .
He used to keep simple flute for bass and medium saptakas and thinnest and smallest flute for string saptakas .
He quickly and beautifully used these three things while playing that the listeners could realize that he is changing the flute .
Hari Prasad Chaurasiya was born on 1st July 1939 in the pious land of Prayag -LRB- Uttar Pradesh -RRB- .
His father was a good wrestler of his times .
Boy Hari Prasad could somehow get school education .
He was very naughty and facetious by behavior during childhood .
He was attracted by the musical environment of the locality .
Master Rajaram used to live top floor of his house .
His mode of earning livelihood was music .
Though the boys and girls at home learned music from him .
Few kids also came to his home to learn .
Wistfully boy Hari Prasad would sit near master Raja Ram and listened to his teachings carefully .
It went on for few days .
A young man used to come to master Raja ram to learn flute .
Seeing him he desired to learn flute .
Boy Hari Prasad was extremely talented since childhood and soon played whatever he was taught on flute .
Not only this he himself started playing few Bollywood tunes on flute .
Coincidentally Varanasi ` s Pandit Bhola nath was appointed at the Allahabad center of all India radio .
His flute attracted Hari Prasad and he started learning flute from Bhola nath .
He also started giving all India radio program since 1955 but the economic condition at home was not good .
He was in search of any kind of livelihood .
Coincidentally there was a requirement for a flute player in the Cuttack center of All India radio and Hari Prasad got that job .
The actual progress of Hari Prasad started from Cuttack .
By the grace of God he got a job of his choice and started heavy practice .
Gradually he became popular .
After few days he was transferred to Bombay .
This place has always been a center for the talented people .
Hari Prasad was completely recognized there and he was welcomed by both classical music world and film industry .
Shree Hari Prasad starts playing from the singing part and while increasing the pace he so beautifully coordinates the tactics part which is ideal for young artists .
The tune that he players at the end of his playing is peerless .
The listeners are amazed to hear the use of such notes .
The way every music lover knows the melody of violin , similarly the creativity , and mood of Pandit Gopal Mishra is not hidden from any music lover .
It could be easily recognized from his face that he became lost while playing .
Father Pandit Sursahay Mishra used to play violin .
Gopal Jee received primary music education from his father .
Late Anokhelal Mishra was really a wonderful taborist of Benaras .
He was comfortable with every singer or player or dancer with whom he was made to sit .
When he used to perform adagio it seemed as if he knew only this but when he performed with a dancer or musician people were amazed to see the trick of his hands .
The way he threw the tunes of Teentaal in an allegro could not have been possible for anybody else .
Pandit Anokhelal was a lean and thin , humble and a soft spoken person .
He remained away from self exhibition .
He himself said that I still have to learn a lot of things .
The entire music world was overwhelmed because of the death of this artist on 2nd March , 1958 .
Despite many difficulties he began learning music from the age of 6 years under the guidance of Pandit Bhairo Prasad .
Talented Allahrakkha khan was not not only a skilled tabor player but also a skilled music director .
He started acting in a theater company of Pathankot at the age of 15 years .
After few days he left the job at theater company and came back to Gurdaspur .
He opened a music school there which could run for few days only .
After some time he went to Lahore with his uncle .
There he became the student of Ustaad Kadir Bakhsh and started learning tabor from him on a regular basis .
He became a skilled artist under his guidance .
Foe few years he also worked in the Lahore and Delhi centers of All India radio .
Allahrakkha was awarded `` Padmashree `` in 1999 .
The famous tabor player of Benaras clan tradition , Pandit Ram Sahay was a able student of Pandit Baldev Sahay .
He could only learn for three years and Pandit Baldev Sahay had to go to Nepal .
He was appointed at the court of Nepal .
Boy Kanthe was hurt due to the demise of his guru .
Anyhow he wanted to go to Nepal .
Fortunately a person from his locality was going to Nepal .
Kanthe Maharaj practiced everyday for so many hours .
Kanthejee was born in 1880 in Varanasi .
Late Kudau Singh was a very popular Drummer of his times .
Kudau singh was a devotee of Goddess and before praying to the goddess he definitely played drum .
After few days a Dhrupad singer came into the state .
Nobody could play drum with him .
He held his head high by pacifying the maniac elephant through `` Gajaparan `` .
He used to wear the cap of tiger ` s leather and put tilak on his forehead .
Chatur lal , the elder brother of violin player Ram narayan not only acquired fame in tabor playing in the country but also overseas .
He went to America with Ustad Ali Akbar Khan in 1955 .
In 1957 he again went to America with Pandit Ravishankar and later went to Europe and Canada for a music visit .
Wherever he went he amazed the listeners and marked an imprint of Indian music .
The real name of late Bacha Mishra was Pandit Hari Sundar Maharaj .
He was himself a good tabor player and his father was also a good tabor player of his times .
Pandit Bacha Mishra was an ultimate devotee of Goddess .
He did not like to speak much .
Bacha Mishra was born in a musician ` s family in 1876 in Varanasi .
His father ` s name was Jagnnath Maharaj and his grandfather ` s name was Pratap Maharaj .
Bacha Mishra died at the age of 50 years in 1926 in Varanasi .
Bhairav Sahay was the nephew and last student of Pandit Sahay .
Pandit Bhairav Sahay was short tempered by nature .
Perhaps that is why he was named Bhairav Sahay .
There was a conjunction of gold and borax and a gem artist was born .
Benaras clan is said to be the sea of verses .
Pandit bhairav Sahay was skilled in all these things and also in tune .
He set the program with whomsoever he sat .
Benaras clan especially the town Kashi has given birth to tabor players of superior quality .
The credit goes to latePandit Ram Sahay Maharaj who have birth to this clan .
Pandit Kanthe Maharaj , Kishan Maharaj , Samta Prasad , sharda Sahay are lamps of this clan .
Late Pandit Ram Sahay was born in 1830 in Kashi .
Boy Ram Sahay started playing tabor wonderfully from the age of 9-10 years .
Boy Ram Sahay learned tabor from Ustad Modu Khan with extreme dedication and hard work .
Modu Khan ` s wife also memorized the sufficient things of tabor .
When Nawab Wajid Ali shah got the throne , he organized a very big musical event where Pandit Ram Sahay pleased Nawab Sahib with his tabor play .
The town Prayag has given birth to many popular artists .
The remarkable name among them is Shree Lal Ji Shrivastava .
His real name was Udaybhan Kishore but he was popular as Lal jee in the music world .
He was born on 14th November , 1924 .
His father ` s name was Shree RajKishore who worked in Uttar Pradesh secretariat .
He lost his father when he was 7 years old and his mother brought him up .
Sometimes during auspicious occasion of the family he used to play drum .
Meanwhile he met Chatarpur ` s Ustad Yusuf Khan and he started learning tabor from him .
For four consecutive years Yusuf Khan learned tabor with passion .
Meanwhile Khan Sahib left Allahabad and moved to Banda .
For 2-3 years he practiced without any teacher .
Fortunately Varanasi ` s Pandit Shyamlal came to Allahabad .
Pandit Shyamlal had taught me so many things .
Lal jee became the student of Pandit Jiyalal and started learning .
Thus Laljee received the tabor ingredients from many scholars .
Anybody who was there with him always kept laughing .
Ustad Shekh Dawood of Hyderabad was born in 1916 in sholapur .
He did not emphasized on self portrayal while in company which is absolutely correct .
Bhopal ` s Kiran Deshpande is one of the major students .
He became paralytic during old age and also lost his memory .
Speaking and recognizing was also difficult .
Finally on 21st March 1992 he left his body and the world .
His students gave him a real tribute by establishing `` Ustad Sheikh Dawood Academy of music `` in Hyderabad in his memo .
Ustaad Habibuddin was not only born in 1899 in Merut but in the clan tradition of Ajrada .
From 12 years of age he started learning from his father but he could only learn for 4 years in his shelter .
He passed away in 1915 .
Khan Sahib was considered to be an unparalleled tabor player of his times .
During the last days of his life he became paralytic victim .
Forget about playing tabor , even speaking became difficult .
He did not even have any savings thus he had to spend the last days of his life with difficulties .
He died on 20th July , 1972 in Meerut .
Late Achchan Maharaj was the eldest of all the three sons of Kalika Prasad .
Achchan Maharaj was considered to be the dance emperor of 20th century .
He expressed very little things through limb movements which was beyond words .
By him even the difficult steps were beautifully presented through dance .
He had complete command over rhythm and tune .
He could easily show the difficult steps .
Late Kalika Prasad the brother of Bindadin Maharaj was a unparalleled artist of his times .
Bindadin lived in Lucknow and Kalika Prasad lived in Benaras .
Both the brothers were skilled in expressing minute movements of Kathak dance .
He gave the training of Thumri singing and dance in Benaras .
Late Jailal was a representative artist of Jaipur tradition of singing .
Ajaruddin Khan was a good tabor player .
He memorized many priceless ingredients of tabor .
Since he was childless he taught all his things to Pandit Jailal .
Thus he became an intellectual of rhythmic knowledge .
Pandit Jailal made daughter Jai Kumarai and son Ram Gopal exactly like him .
Till the end Ram Gopal stayed in Kolkata and Jai Kumari became a resident of Golok in 1949 .
Every intellectual appreciates the intellect of Pandit Jailal .
Pandit Jailal was the scholar of rhythm , tune and text .
He could very easily present the most difficult steps .
The beauty of dance reached its peak with long curtains , people and tabor-instruments .
Such artists are rare .
The credit of popularizing Kathak dance goes to late Bindadin Maharaj .
Bindadin had a brother .
The name of his brother was Kalika Prasad .
Kalika Prasad had three sons - Acchan , Lachchu and shambhu Maharaj and Bindadin had no sons .
Thus he taught dance to his nephew Acchchan Maharaj like a son .
Maharaj Bindadin learned dance from his father Durga Prasad and uncle Chacha Thakur .
He practiced everyday for 12 hours .
Everybody was amazed to see his dance as his preparation was no less than Kodau Singh .
Nawab Sahib became happy with his performance and gave him a lot of money as cash prize .
After growing young Bindadin Maharaj earned fame and money .
Bindadin Maharaj was as skilled in singing Thumri as he was in dance .
He died in 1918 .
Smt . Mrinalini Sarabhai is not only an expert in Indian dance forms but also equally good in the dance forms of other countries .
After coming back to India she learned Indian dance from Gurudev Rabindra Nath Tagore ` s Shanti Niketan and majorly participated in Gurudeb ` s plays .
She visited significant places of India with him .
She established an institution named `` Darpan `` in Ahmedabad for pure dance education where dance , instruments and singing is taught .
The representative of klucknow clan and Shambhu Maharaj ` s brother was directing dance in films after staying in Mumbai for few days .
It can be said to be the misfortune of music that good artists join Bollywood for earning livelihood and common people do not get the benefit of their immense knowledge .
Lachchu Maharaj was the son of late Kalika Prasad and considered to be the jewel of Lucknow clan .
Bindadin Maharaj had no sons .
He went under the asylum of Nawab of Rampur for few days .
Pandit Uday shankar ` s teacher late Pandit Shankaran Nambudaripadan was born in a place called Ambalpujha in travancore , south India .
Shankar Nambudaripadan ` s father did farming and was a person of protestant ideology .
He never wanted his son to learn music and that too dance .
In the beginning Shankaran hid from his father and kept learning Kathakali .
seeing the talent of his son Shankaran permitted him to learn Kathakali dance .
Shankaran learned from many teachers and very soon became a good dancer .
Further he visited many major places and presented his program .
The dance emperor of Lucknow clan , Pandit Shambhu Maharaj holds a special place in Kathak dance .
He sang Thumri and presented its different moods in such a manner that the viewers became mesmerized .
Shambhu Maharaj sang Thumri , Dadra , Gazal , Bhajan etc with deep devotion .
The big shot Shambhu Maharaj of Lucknow clan died on 4th November , 1970 in Delhi .
For the last three months he was suffering from Cancer .
He got cancer in his throat .
All music lovers became still with his death but nothing can be done before God .
Every music lover had to be patient thinking this .
Everybody was eager to learn from the popular dance guru of India , Shambhu Maharaj .
The credit of making dance gurus like Sitara Devi , Damyanti Jishi , Birju Maharaj , Bandana Se , Gopi Krishna etc . goes to shambhu Maharaj .
Late Pandit Ahobal ` s name han never be forgotten in the history of Indian music .
While at one place he established his notes on the 22 homographs considering the ancient tradition at other place he created modern notes by establishing seven pure and 5 deformed notes on the strings of violin .
Pandit Ahobal was the first person in the history of music who set the place of notes on the strings of lute .
Pandit Ahobal was born before the seventeenth century in south India .
Deciding the number of notes to be 12 and determining the length of each note indicates his resourcefulness and intellect .
Before Ahobal the distance of notes was measured through homonyms but making a provision of the length of the string he made music more scientific .
The fact which was discovered by western scientists in the 19th century was successfully done by Ahobal in 17th century without any equipments .
Ahobal died after seventeenth century .
From the name it seems as if E . Clements is non Indian and this prediction is cent percent correct .
He has no interest in Indian music but was a fan and supporter of Indian music .
Natya shastra created by Bharat and Trankar created by sharangdev were the main center of his study .
Many of his succinct and revealing write ups were published because of which the music lovers could estimate the perfection of their interest , studies and reflection .
G. B . Achrekar and Krishna Rao Mule revised and enhanced his writings .
E. Clements was also supported by Abdul Karim khan .
Abdul Karim Khan was a good singer of those times .
He did intense reading of ancient music such as gram , murchchna , gram raga etc . and understood and accepted the spiritual significance of Indian music .
Because of his efforts , respect and dedication towards music increased .
Dedication and contribution by a foreign national towards Indian music can not be forgotten .
Ibrahim Adilshah -LRB- II -RRB- is called with respect among the rulers of Bijapur .
He was not only a patron of music but also knew deep secrets of music .
He was such a high level artist of music that other musicians were like his students .
We get to know about the depth of his knowledge through his book `` Kitaab-e-Nauras `` .
This book was edited by Dr . Nazeer Ahmad of Lucknow University and was published by Indian art Center .
Sultan Ibrahim learned music from Bakhtar Khan of Bijapur .
Apart from singing Dhuvpad , Sultan Ibrahim was also skilled in playing an instrument called `` Tambur `` .
He gave lyrics to many Dhruvpada and sang them with rhyme .
There are 59 dhruvpadas in Kitaab-e-Nauras but since there is no script of the notes their original structure has not been known .
Only the raga has been named above the lyrics of the song and that also is insufficient .
Majority of his Dhruvapadas are filled with praises of goddess Saraswati and Ganesha .
Dhrupad songs are written in Dravidian language which form the basis of Urdu and Hindi .
He has given a beautiful look to some ragas in few songs which became the basis of Ragmala paintings of southern style .
He was also interested in paintings .
Southern school of painting developed under his patronage .
On the basis of the picture of the ragas told by him Raga mala painting of southern style was made .
Thus Ibrahim Adilshah -LRB- II -RRB- served music and painting .
He was born in 1580 and died in 1627 .
Krishnanad sang in the court of Udaipur Maharaj .
While traveling he heard the singing of whoever musician , singer of artist he met and also made them listen to his songs and consulted them .
He immediately penned down the knowledge whatever he got from them .
He also collected materials from ancient texts and libraries .
Thus his musical quest continued .
Krishnanand reached Kolkata after collecting sufficient materials on music .
He established his private press there and four sections of `` Raga Kalpdrum `` were published in the same press in a big way .
The first section has 725 pages .
For the first time Hindi songs were published in such a large number in this text .
Apart from Braj , there are songs in Urdu , Bangla , Marwari and Punjabi languages .
The second section of Rag Kalpdrum has 590 pages .
It has the list of the lists of such music texts which have not been published yet .
It has the name of those 205 poets and singers whose songs are there in this book .
The third section has 340 pages .
Most of the songs are from Bengal and published in Bangla language .
The fourth section has 744 pages .
It mostly has Soordas ` s verses .
Brihaspati jee was born on 20th January , 1918 in Rampur , Uttar Pradesh .
Boy Kailash learned little Sanskrit under the guidance of father .
His mother Narmada Devi brought him up with difficulty .
His mother was wakeful and excited about his Sanskrit education .
He received the degree of Shastri from Lahore in 1936 at the age of 18 years .
After coming back from Lahore he got teaching work in Rampur .
In 1941 he got teaching work in Vikramajit Singh college of Sanatan religion in Kanpur for teaching religion .
Meanwhile he kept writing literary compositions , translations and poems for All India radio .
Before coming to Kanpur he had learned singing and Mridangam in Rampur .
Apart from Sanskrit he had good knowledge of Urdu , Persian and Arabic .
He also composed few couplets in Urdu language .
While at one side he was a good scholar of Sanskrit on the other side an amusing speaker .
He was a unique repartee .
The questioners became speechless with his answers .
In 1965 he was invited for the post of Councillor in Music , Sanskrit and Braj language from the Delhi center of All India radio which was cheerfully accepted by him .
Till 1978 he brought prosperity to the All India radio museum .
His main objective was to universalize the availability of ancient texts and to remove the illusions of the people related with them .
While at one place Pandit Jaidev was an erudite scholar of Sanskrit he was equally good in Music .
The verses of `` Geetgovinda `` describes the flirtations of Radha and Krishna .
This text has also been translated in many Non Indian languages such as Latin , German , English etc .
There are also few Dhrupadas composed by Jaidev .
Since `` Geetagovinda `` was in Sanskrit its songs could not be circulated publicly although these verses are full of elegance .
Poet Jaidev was born in Kendula village , Bengal in 12th century .
Because of the death of his parents during childhood he disappointingly went to JagganthPuri and started staying there in Purushottan Dham .
On 19th September , 1893 Jaidev Singh was born in a Kshatriya family in Basti district of Uttar Pradesh .
He learned music from many scholars .
Few days later he stopped singing because of throat ailment .
Thus he concentrated on the development of Music science .
In 1937 he established a music organization named `` Kanpur music society `` with a view to propagate music .
According to this an All India music conference was organized every year for the past 17 years where distinguished musicians of the country used to participate .
In 1945 he became the Principal of `` Yuvraj Dutt School `` Lakhimpur Khiri , Uttar Pradesh .
After leaving that he became the chief producer of All India radio .
Distinguished musicians were called to Delhi and their songs and playing were recorded in tapes thus prospering the All India radio museum .
Tansen festival was started every year in Gwalior .
For six years he served the post of chairman of Uttar Pradesh music & theater academy .
As a representative of Indian government he was sent to Japan to participate in the western oriental music concert .
He impressed the listeners present there with his speech on Indian music .
Thus he has always served music .
He wrote many significant articles on music which were published in various magazines .
Amongst the able students of Pandit Vishnu Digambar Paluskar , Narayan Moreshar was such a musician who along with music was also associated with politics .
Narayan Moreshar was born in a Brahmin family in 1989 in Taas village of Satara district in Maharashtra .
Narayan got the interest for music from his mother .
His mother made him listen devotional songs and folk songs since childhood .
Once Pandit Vishnu Miraj had come .
He was impressed with the singing of boy Narayan and offered to teach him music .
He went to Lahore to learn music from Pandit jee .
With the permission of Pandit Digambar jee in 1919 he went teach music in the `` Satyagrah Ashram `` set up by Gandhijee .
His feeling of nationalism became more strong by being in touch with Gandhijee .
There he came up with `` Ashram Bhajnawali `` .
In 1921 he organized a successful music concert in Ahmadabad .
A new type of raga classification `` Ragang method `` has been highlighted in music philosophy .
Along with school education Premlata learned dancing and instrumental music in Delhi .
Since Premlata was talented and hardworking he passed high school , intermediate and graduation at a very young age .
He learned Sanskrit language and Dhrupad singing from Mathura .
He passed his M.A exam as an individual student from Benaras Hindu University .
Then after from there itself she registered herself as a Sanskrit research scholar after completing her M.A in Sanskrit as an individual student .
Meanwhile he met Pandit Omkar Nath thakur .
He took admission `` Shree Kala Sangeet Bharti `` the music institution of the University .
There he learned singing from Pandit Balwantrai Bhatt and Pandit Omkarnath .
Meanwhile she kept writing for Pandit Omkarnath jee ` s books and Sangeetanjali and Pravan bharti were created in six parts .
In 1955 he passed the exam of `` Sangeetalankar `` in singing .
After getting so many degrees she was appointed at the post of music lecturer in Shree Kala Sangeet Bharti -LRB- present name - `` Music and theater art Faculty -RRB- .
For three years she also remained the chancellor of Indira music University , Khauragadh .
She also translated `` Brihdweshi `` by Matang and `` Sangeet Ratnakar `` by Sharangdev in English .
Thus she spent her entire life in resolving the complex problems of music science .
Late Pandit Firoz Fram Jee , the contemporary music scholar of Pandit Vishnu Narayan Bhatkhande was born on 19th February , 1878 in Bombay .
He definitely listened to every music program .
After passing matriculation he started some work to earn money but this music lover did not like all these works .
The whole day he worked hard to write books .
He wrote 36 books because of which the music world was greatly benefited .
Unfortunately out of them very few books are available in market .
There has been many Bharats in the history of music but here we are referring to Maharshi Bharat the immortal writer of `` Natya shastra `` .
One can know about his personality merely by observing his texts but everyone has considered it to be a text of 5th century .
Basically `` Natya shastra is not a music text but its last six chapters interpret music science .
This is the proof that during that time there was a close relationship between music and theater .
When we look at Bharat ` s experiment with `` Sarna Chatushtai `` we see that he had good knowledge of singing .
From the perspective of music this is the first text which has scientific and universal interpretation of music science .
Many of the things about music science told by Bharat are still believed .
The Natya shastra created by Bharata is said to be the basic text of both northern and southern methods of music .
Mansingh tomar is considered to be the father of Gwalior tradition .
Mansingh Tomar ruled the throne of Gwalior in between 15th century to 16th century .
He was appointed as the musician in his court .
He was not only a music lover but a great scholar & musician .
Man singh Tomar created a music text called `` Mankautuhal `` , where he has thrown light on music science and has given few song scripts .
Some of the verses given here are composed by Mansingh which depicts his literary knowledge .
This text was translated by Fakirullah in Persian in 1673 and named it `` Sangeet Darpan `` .
It is unfortunate that the original copy of `` Mankautuhal `` is not available now .
It is unfortunate for the music world that no information regarding previous scholars , their lives and work is available .
It is fortunate that most of their creations are available but since these figures keep themselves away from self-performance , they have not introduced themselves in their creations .
Only this information is available that the author of the text `` Vrihdweshi `` is Matang .
This text gives the detailed introduction of `` Gram and Murchana `` .
The word `` raga `` was introduced in this text for the first time .
Describing indigenous raga he wrote that the raga prevalent in common masses is indigenous raga .
`` Vrihdweshi `` composed by Matanga is the first book in the history of music which describes the raga for the first time .
He used to play Chitra Veena but he created a new kind of Veena called `` Kinnari Veena `` where he put screen .
Raja Nawab Ali , the baron of Akbar ` s province in Sitapur district of Uttar Pradesh was a great lover and scholar of Indian music .
He primarily learned music from Nazir Khan .
Further Nawab Ali learned many Dhuvapadas and Dhamar from Muhammad Ali .
Thus he had good collection of music .
Later he wrote a book in Urdu named `` Muarifunnagmat `` in three sections .
Its Hindi version has also been published .
Apart from singing Raja Nawab Ali also learned sitar but his main passion was singing .
Meanwhile Raja Nawab Ali organized music concerts and tried to remove the illusions related to music .
The author of the famous text `` Swarmelkalanidhi `` is Pandit Ramamatya who wrote it around 1550 .
The real name of Ramatya was Rama .
He got the designation of minister -LRB- Amatya -RRB- from the king thus his full name was Ramatya .
Ramamatya was also inclined towards music .
The real voice of Ramamatya was similar to Sharangdev .
In 17th century Hridaya Narayan Dev created the texts `` Hridaya-kautuk `` and `` Hridaya Prakash `` in Sanskrit language .
In the second text he has set tunes on the strings of lute similar to that of Ahobal .
Both these texts are considered to be significant from the point of view of revelation .
The famous musician of south India late Pandit Vyankatmukhi has become immortal because of his text `` Chaturdiprakashika `` .
There is a great significance of this text in southern method of music and is considered to be excellent among ancient music books .
Pandit Vyankatmukhi has proved that by mathematics through a combination or `` That `` more than 32 `` thats `` can be created but he has only recognized 19 combinations for experiment .
From where 55 ragas originate .
The literal meaning of Chaturdandiprakashika is someone who publishes four disciplines .
Pandit Vyankatmukhi said that there are four disciplines or pillars of music .
Later all the musicians of Karnataka were influenced by Pandit Vyankatmakhi .
No information is available regarding late Pandit Srinivas .
His text `` Raga tatva Vibodh `` is significant from the perspective of setting tunes on the strings of lute .
In this he clarified the difficult and ambiguous places for Ahobal ` s text , `` Sangeet Parijat `` .
Ahobal was the first scholar who measured the length of the string by setting 12 tunes on the strings of lute but he was not clear at few places .
Following him Srinivas determined the place of tunes on the strings of lute and cleared Ahobal wherever he was unclear .
Srinivas had an addiction of collecting music texts .
Every music inquisitive is aware of `` Sangeet Ratnakar `` the immortal creation of Pandit Shangardev .
He has collected the summary of all his previous texts in this book .
With every chapter there is a description of technical words and other essential ingredients .
It gives an introduction of his wisdom when we throw light on all the aspects of music .
This text is considered to be the basic text of both the methods of music .
Since they are written in Sutra style it is difficult to understand it at few places and there are multiple interpretations of a single verse .
there are disagreements amongst the scholars regarding the birth date of Sharangdev .
Majority of the scholars believe his birth date to be before 13th century .
Saurendra Mohan Tagore -LRB- Thakur -RRB- was born in 1840 in Kolkata .
Boy Saurendra was rich in naturally talented thus became skilled in literature , music and history very soon .
From the age of eight years he started learning music from his father .
After Indian music he also learned western music .
Many contemporary musicians used to come to his home while he was in Kolkata .
Therefore he got the chance to listen , test and stay in contact with a lot of people .
It increased his knowledge of music all the more .
`` Yantrakhsetra Deepika `` in Bangla and `` Universal history of music `` in English got good recognition .
In 1875 and in 1884 he was awarded with the degree of `` Doctorate of music `` by Philadelphia University of america and Oxford University respectively .
He established `` Bang Sangeet Vidyalaya `` and `` Bengal academy of music `` in Kolkata .
Sadaranga and Adaranga ` s name is everywhere when it comes to the prevalence of khyals because they composed big and small khyals .
The reall name of Sadarang and Adarang is Niyamat Khan and Firoz khan .
Adarang -LRB- Firoz Khan -RRB- and Sadarang -LRB- Niyamat Khan -RRB- had sons .
The tenth generation of Tansen ` s daughter was Sadarang .
His full surname was Sadarangeele .
He was there in the court of Mohammad shah .
Mohammad shah ruled from 1719-1748 .
He used to put his name also in the songs in order to make him happy .
He put `` Sada Rangeeley Momdasa `` in all his son .
The emperor also listened to such songs with great interest .
Gradually Khyal was propagated and with that Sadarang also became immortal .
Sdarang not only created khyals but also some dhrupadas and many dhamars .
He has primarily used Braj language in his creations .
Sadarang himself sang dhrupadas and played flute but taught khyal to his students .
He used to sing dhrupadas in concerts not khyals .
The king of Jaipur , Maharaja Sawai Pratap Singh gave a commendable service to music at the end of 18th century .
He not only liked Indian music but also had good knowledge of music .
Sawai Pratap singh collected the conclusion of the debate of musicians and scholars and named it `` Radha Govind Singh saar `` or in short `` Sangeet Saar `` .
This book has been written in Braj and it has 7 cantos .
It gives an introduction of her music talent .
Pune singing society got this text published near around 1810 but now its copies are unavailable .
Sir William Jones was a foreign musician who at one side had good knowledge of western music and at other side of Indian music -LRB- Both science and action -RRB- .
He was an individual of sharp brain who along with music had knowledge of 13 languages .
William Jones read the basic texts of music such as Sangeet Ratnakar , Raga Vivodh , Raga Darpan , abha Vinod etc . and mentioned the names of vowels and revelation .
William Jones saw `` Tohfat-ul-hind `` , the Persian translation of `` Sangeet Darpan `` .
William Jones was unsatisfied with that translation .
M.S. subbalakshmi born on 16th September , 1916 in a devadasi family in Madurai town of southern India was the first woman who got `` Bharat Ratna `` , the highest honor of the country .
Generally this honorary award was given to politicians but since 1998 it was started being given to musicians also and she was the first woman musician to be chosen for this award .
Her real name was Kunjamma .
Her mother was a singer and lutanist in the Minaxi temple of Madurai .
Elder sister also used to play lute and the brother played mridanga .
She learned Karnatik music from her mother and Srinivas Ayangar .
she was also interested in Indian music thus she learned khyal , Thumri and Tappa from Narayan Rao Vyas , Dilip Kumar Rai and Siddeswari Devi .
In 1930 when the Columbia Gramophone Company came up with its first record , her voice was appreciated by the entire music world .
she also acted and sang for few films .
In 1932 her program was successful in a music concert at the music and theater academy .
Her husband T . shadshiv cooperated her in her music programs .
He always remained alert during recordings .
On the request of Mahatma Gandhi Subbalakshmi gave many programs for `` Kasturba Smarak Nidhi `` .
she was given the Magsaysay award for social service in 1974 .
She was given the degree of D. litt from Ravindra Bharti and Delhi University .
she became the first woman chairperson of Madras music and theater academy .
She was awarded `` Padmabhushan `` in 1954 and `` Padmavibhushan `` in 1975 by the Indian government .
Finally in 1998 he was ornamented with `` Bharat Ratna `` , the highest award of India .
P. Sambamurti , an individual rich in ethereal talent was born on 14th February , 1901 in a Brahmin family of South India .
His father ` s name was Shree Pichu Aiyar who worked in railways .
His father died when he was just 4 years old .
His mother was a religious lady .
she up-brought boy Sambamurti with great affection .
she used to narrate religious stories and devotional songs to her son , thus boy Sambamurti learned many devotional songs .
Sambamurti also learned a lot many devotional songs from a teacher of his school .
Since he had a melodious voice he started getting invitation for singing devotional songs .
Meanwhile he learned flute from Shree Krishnamurti and later learned flute from flutist Venkatramashastri .
He passed B.a exam from Presidency College , Madras .
Sambamurti got music teacher ` s work in many schools which was readily accepted by him .
Meanwhile he also wrote and researched on subjects concerning music .
Apart from flute he also learned fiddle and lute .
The vice President of India , Dr . Rdhakrishnan awarded him with `` Sangeet shastra Praveen `` on 1st January , 1954 .
Purandardas of Karnatik music was a musician who has done such great works in the field of music that he he considered to be the `` First teacher and patron of karnatik music .
Karnatik music learning began with the voice of `` Dheershankarabharan `` -LRB- bilawal -RRB- before Mayamalavgaud .
Purandardas has the credit of strengthening this new combination .
In his song `` Mukhari `` he has talked about creating 4,75,000 compositions .
According to Thakur Jaidev singh there seldom exists a musician who has created these many compositions .
Purandardas was born in a famous and aristocratic family of Purandargarh village in Bellari district .
His father was a jewel trader , zamindar and rich .
Boy Purandar was hardworking since the beginning therefore he became skilled in Sanskrit , Kannad language and music very soon .
He donated all his wealth and became a saint .
He started singing the verses of Bhagwata through the medium of music .
This spirituality was culminated in millions of creations and on 2nd January 1564 he passed away .
Muthuswami was born in March 1775 as a elder brother to Ramaswami Dichittar .
His father was a popular musician and music scholar of his times .
He taught intense music science to his son Muthuswamy on the basis of Vyankatmukhi .
Apart from singing Muthuswamy also learned lute and became a skilled lutanist .
Futher he also learned grammar , astrology , poetry and monistic philosophy .
Taking the permission of his father Chidambaram went to Varanasi with Swamy stayed there for 5-6 years .
In Benaras he learned the tantric method from techer chidambaram and monistic philosophy from Shankar .
There he came in contact with Indian music which influenced some of his songs .
Some of his songs are found in Raga Jayjaywanti , Yaman Kalyan and Vrindavani Sarang .
Wherever he went he composed devotional songs .
Most of his sings are in slow motion which become clear by the beauty of its raga and experimenting with it in different ways .
By his creation `` Navgrah `` based on the nine planets one gets to estimate the extent of his astrology .
While worshiping goddess Parvati during Navratri , for all the nine days he created different compositions everyday and named it `` Navvarn Kriti `` .
These works are of good standard which gives an introduction of his intelligence and creativity .
After the 18th century few great personalities were born in south India who prospered Karnatic music .
One among them is Pandit Tyagraj .
His contemporaries were Muthuswami Dixit and Shyam shastri .
The three of them were called `` Sangeet Trimurti `` of Karnatik music .
Tyagraj was born on 4th May , 1867 in Tiruwaroor .
His father ` s name was Ramabrahma and mother ` s name sitamma .
His father was a great scholar of Sanskrit and Telugu and mother was a homely woman of religious values .
Tyagraj learned Sanskrit and Telugu from his father and religious songs especially those of Purandardas from his mother .
In order to learn religious songs he inclined towards music .
Tyagraj ` s maternal grandfather was a musician at V . K. aiyyar ` s court and his grandfather Giriraj was a respected and recognized poet .
Tyagrag composed almost 2000 works .
Most of his works are in Telugu but he has also composed few works in Sanskrit .
Apart from that he also wrote many musical dramas .
His creations are of high standard both in terms of voice and literature .
While choosing the ragas he made both prevalent and non prevalent ragas as his creation .
In other words he made ragas in 72 combinations .
His devotional prayers were so popular that it rests on every singer ` s lips .
He also composed few group creations .
Here 5 or 9 persons together sing a composition .
There is a beautiful combination of five ragas in the creation Panchratnam .
His students propagated his works an some of his students also became popular composers .
Thus while serving his god Rama and music he passed away on 6th January , 1847 .
A monument has been built in his memory in Tiruwayar where every year Tyagrag prayer ceremony is organized .
Famous musicians , music lovers and devotees gather together to pay tribute .
Shyama Shastri was born in 26th April 1762 in a place named Tiruwaroor in Tanjaur district .
His father ` s name was Vishwanath Aiyyar .
He was the only son of his father .
the real name of Shyama Shastri was Vyankatsubramaniya .
His affectionate name while in childhood was Shyama Krishna which he used in his works .
He learned Sanskrit and Telugu from his father and primary music learning from his uncle .
Later he received further education from music scholar who had reached Tanjaur from Benaras .
After the death of his father he started praying in temple .
He spent the rest for the time in music devotion .
Gradually he became a good artist and poet .
`` Navratna Malika `` was one of his composed work which had beautiful combination of 9 compositions .
It praised goddess Minaxi of Madurai temple which he himself used to sing in front of the goddess .
His work used to to difficult in terms of tone and rhythm .
Most of his works were forgotten .
He wrote in three languages Tamil , Telugu and Sanskrit .
He made 300 compositions of Kriti , Swarjati and Warnam .
He was fond of raga Anandbhairavi because most of his creations are embedded in the tunes of this raga .
Tyagraj , Shyama Shastri and Muthuswami were said to be the three gods -LRB- Trimurti -RRB- of music who contributed in reestablishing Karnatik music .
In July , 1893 a boy was born to late Shankarrao Pandit , the popular musician of Gwalior tradition of music .
This talented boy was named Krishnarao Shankar Pandit .
He started learning music since childhood .
Thus he had started experiencing theater singing since the beginning .
There was no place left in northern India where Shankar Pandit had not sung and his son Krishnarao had not been with him .
Later Krishnarao proved to be an able student and son of an able teacher and father by performing a successful music program at those places .
Quite often he gave successful programs in music concerts outside India .
He also became the music teacher of King Satara for a year .
This relationship was against his behavior so he left it .
He not only knew singing but apart from singing he was also learning other auxiliary instruments .
The singing style of Pandit jee occupied a special place in music world .
Open and ponderous voice has been the tradition of Gwalior tradition of music .
He used to sing complicated movements and tones with preparation in all the three Saptakas .
He served music by staying Gwalior during the last days of his life and after some ill health he left this world on 22nd August , 1989 .
Miss Kesar Bai Kerkar is the leading name among the students of late Alladiya Khan .
Kesar Bai learned music from many people .
It proves that he did not hesitate in getting any kind of knowledge .
His music education began by late Abdul Karim Khan .
Few days later he got the news that Pandit Ramkrishna Bajhe has come near Goa .
He became happy to know this .
He also affectionately taught girl Kesar .
Pandit Bajhe got a job in a village called Bandaur away from there .
Hence he went there .
Kesar Bai was devoted to learning that she even went to Bandaur and her music education continued there .
Few days later Barkat Ulla went to Patiala state and Kesar Bai again started searching a good teacher .
Fortunately she met Khan Sahib Alladiya .
Khan sahib stayed in Bombay for few days only and then moved to Kolhapur because of ill-health .
Then again Kesar Bai had to stop learning .
She became upset with this irregularity and was in melancholy but suddenly again she became enthusiastic and decided that she will definitely learn classical music .
she had a strong desire to learn music from Alladiya Khan but Khan Sahib was not ready to teach her for some reason .
Kesar Bai remained upset with Alladiya Khan disagreement .
Finally Bombay ` s businessman Bitthaldas helped Kesarbai .
He requested Khan Sahib to teach music to Kesarbai .
After many conditions Alladiya Khan agreed to teach her .
One of the many conditions was that Kesarbai has to learn music from him for 10 years .
She cheerfully accepted all the conditions of Khan Sahib .
Then Alladiya Khan started teaching her with great dedication and Kesar Bai started practicing with double enthusiasm .
Gopal Nayak was a native of south and royal singer of King Ramdev of Rajgiri .
It is said that Amir Khusro beat him in music competition since he was very innocent .
In 1924 Alauddin Khilji attacked Devgiri and conquered it .
It is said that Khilji asked Gopal Nayak to sing .
Gopal kept singing for 6 days .
Later when Khusro came then Gopal invited him for music competition .
Amir Khusro very well knew the natural talent of Gopal Nayak thus he took him to Delhi with him .
Amir Khusro stayed in Delhi with Gopal Nayak and remained engaged in music devotion till his death .
Miss Gangu Bai Hangal is unique among women singers .
Mrs. Gangu Bai Hangal was born in February , 1913 in Dharwad .
Her father ` s name was Shree Chikku Rao and mother ` s name was Smt . Amba Bai .
Shree Ramabhau worked in a theater company .
He had to move with the theater company wherever it went .
Hence during that time Gangu Bai could not get regular education from him .
Gangu Bai was eager to learn music .
Thus meanwhile she started learning music from her uncle Shree Dato Pant Desai .
Few days later Rambhau released himself from theater company and started living in Kundgol .
Then again she started learning from him but his residence was almost 11 miles away from Kundgol .
GanguBai traveled 11 miles everyday went to learn music .
Holy city Kashi has always been the mother of literature and music .
At one side it has given birth to many literary figures and at another side to many musicians .
Mrs. Girija Devi is the leading name amongst them .
Expertise in Thumri can be said to be the special contribution by Varanasi but singing Khyal and Thappa with the same skill is a commendable thing for Girija Devi .
Only few days later Sarju Prasad passed away .
Then became worried to find an able teacher .
The small fraction of nasal sound during the attachment with vowels do not strike the ears but seems interesting .
With proper practice the song seems to be firm .
Singing is expressive whose touch can be seen in Thumri and other folk songs .
At present it should be the aim of singers to successfully sing the folk songs apart from classical music . Girija Devi is a successful musician from this point of view .
Pandit Jasraj was born on 20th January , 1930 in Hisar in a musicians ` family .
Before singing , boy Jasraj was taught tabor playing but he did not find it interesting .
elder brother Mani Ram taught him singing and when he started singing well then both the brothers performed duet singing programs and it was appreciated by the audiences .
The ever first public program of Pandit Jasraj was held in 1952 in Nepal levee .
Pandit Jasraj opened up with that program and the next program `` Swami Haridas music concert `` in Bombay was very successful .
Then after he started presenting duets with his brother and teacher Pandit Maniram .
Though Pandit Jasraj represents Mewati tradition of singing but he says that an individual should be appreciative in order to be a successful artist in modern times .
He should not hesitate in getting specialty of every tradition of singing .
That is why the co-ordination of melody , attachment for tunes and expertise with rhythm and literature that Pandit Jasraj has is ideal for every music seeker .
Pandit Narayan Rao Vyas , the student of Pandit vishnu Digambar was born in 1902 in Kolhapur .
His father ` s name was Ganesh Vyas and mother ` s name was Smt . Rama Bai .
Boy Narayan Rao was also anxious to learn music .
Fortunately in 1910 Pandit Vishnu Digambar reached Kolhapur with his students .
Narayan Rao and his family was impressed with Pandit Vishnu Digambar jee ` s singing .
It is possible only when the things related to films are presented in a critical way .
Anyway the trend of the past 2-3 years says that the films of big banners are becoming flop and low budget films with new characters are being appreciated and collecting money as well .
