Humans have understood its significance from the perspective of entertainment and health also .
Many games and players are getting popular because of the competitions being held amongst various countries in the modern world .
Because of international competitions as well like Olympic and Asian games etc interest towards games have aroused .
Thus seeing the mass interest towards games , there are frequent publications in the magazines related to sports news and associated columns .
Generally all leading newspapers dedicate a whole page to the activities of sports world .
Many magazines like Sports-players , sports time , sports activities , sports week etc have been keeping place for sports activities of the entire world in their articles .
Sports journalism has definitely got encouragement with the publication of such magazines .
If exploratory journalism is fired with fair objectives then it can be a big service for the society and nation .
If such a journalism is done with the intention of assassinating someone ` s character or insulting or defaming an organization then it comes into the category of `` Yellow journalism `` .
The prime objective of exploratory journalism should be purity in sociopolitical life .
Clarifying exploratory and research journalism , Praveen Dixit has written - `` A comprehensive meaning Investigative journalism can also be said to be a kind of research journalism .
In such a condition either the literary-cultural programs do not get place and if at all they get it is on such a place which is considered to be not so significant from the perspective of news .
Thus it is essential to provide reasonable encouragement to the activities like leading public meetings , literary meetings , book release , poets ` meeting , intellectual debates , dance , theater etc through the medium of journalism .
Our society is quite influenced by the films today .
Thus how can our journalism remain untouched by the fi s ?
Film Analysis , interviews of film artists , their activities and analytical articles on films etc are the major aspects of film journalism .
Those programs of Akashvani that have more of news element are significant from the perspective of radio journalism .
News service division has the major responsibility of preparing these programs of Akashvani .
The news of television programs is the area of T . V . journalism like radio journalism .
For this special technical knowledge is also required .
The knowledge of writing , words , sound , hearing , sight sound and film technology are also required for a T . V . journalis .
Our daily life is being affected by science on every step .
Thus the interest of common people in science is natural .
Research related to science and the activities of science world can only reach the common masses through the medium of science journalism .
For this it is essential for the journalists to deliver the technical , serious subject like science in a easy and lucid way to the readers .
At Present the science related magazines have a significant contribution in the development of science journalism .
Journalism can have many areas apart from this also such as political journalism , commentary journalism , child journalism , braille journalism , photo journalism etc .
The official credit of beginning Journalism in India goes to the British .
The formal beginning of journalism in India began with the weekly ` Calcutta general advertiser ` or ` Hicky ` s gazette started by James Augustus Hicky on 29th January , 1780 .
The initiation of Journalism in India might go to the Britishers but soon this journalism became associated with Indian soil and became a symbol of the expectations of crores of countrymen .
This journey of journalism had been very exciting and struggling .
Hicky ` s Gazette had initiated the path of struggle against the oppression by authorities since the beginning .
In the contemporary scenario following this courageous path the Indian journalism started the struggle in the favor of truth and justice .
The collision with the authority was obvious in such a situation .
Many pages of the history of unfree India are full of examples of freedom expressions towards the faith of newspapers .
The law makes the citizens aware of their duties .
Press should remain wary towards its social , cultural , economical and political responsibilities being in its limit and its freedom should not convert in its willfulness therefore some press regulations were issued in free India .
Those major regulations that have direct relation to Press are being discussed here in short .
The articles 19-22 of the Indian constitution mentions various sides of freedom rights .
According to article 19 the first freedom is the `` freedom of expression and speech `` amongst the basic freedom rights that have been given to the Indian citizens .
There is no separate provision for the freedom of Press in the constitution .
But the freedom of Press is hidden in the freedom of speech and expression .
As a common Indian man is capable of using this freedom .
In the freedom of speech there is a permission for a thoughtful intervention or impose a ban .
It can eventually be decided by the supreme court or the high court .
On the violation of any of these rights by the government anyone can appeal for justice on the basis of article 32 in the  supreme court and in high court on the basis of article 226 if it lies in the right of his region .
Defamation of any person is both criminal offense and tort . .
The meaning of defamation is to publish such a saying which generally has the nature of putting down the members with true ideologies else who has the nature that people should remain away of such person .
For defamation related provisions the honor of a person is considered to be a significant asset .
Protecting this honor is the ethereal right of an individual .
The attempts to hurt and destroy the honor of an individual has been considered crime from legal point of view .
The honor possessed by an individual is not a material asset .
Every individual in the society wants to lead a honored life .
The news papers should keep special attention in this reference .
It is the responsibility of the journalists that while reporting they should keep in mind they should not send news based on unclear , unauthentic and hearsay talks .
One can not escape the offense of defamation by writing ` it is said that , it is heard that etc .
Thus any news should be sent or published only after unbiased testing of authenticity and reliability of the evidences .
Defamation can be in two forms - either in written or in oral form .
The law of court ` s contempt is extremely comprehensive .
A little carelessness can be a cause of trouble for the journalists .
This law of court ` s contempt has been framed to maintain faith of common man in the reliability of judicial system and its purity .
As a matter of fact the Indian newspapers and journalists have been totally careful ff following this law .
The commission of newspaper believes that the Indian newspapers have been wakeful of keeping the honor of courts .
The successful establishment of right to information in democracy is significant .
It is also an utmost need of successful democracy .
In a study done in the joint auspices of Press council and Indian institute of management elaborate criticism of papers related to this have been carried .
Thinking on the concept of open government it has been said in the study that two major bodies of the government legislative and judiciary work in an open way .
Legislative works through the mutual discussions of its elected representatives as far is the reach of people and Press .
Thus the judiciary takes its decision regarding the cases after hearing all the parties in open court .
These departments generally do not do their work confidentially .
While on the other side executive works from secret chambers where the people can hardly reach .
Under the interpretable law penalty can be given for violating the secret in the following situations .
Attempt to communicate with the foreign agents which harms the national interests .
Claiming to be a government official illegally .
Handing over the the government stamps , pictures , confidential plans etc to an unofficial person .
Use of government stamps without departmental permission .
Unofficial efforts of any kind to change the passport , navy , air force , police or political pass , certificate , license etc .
Illegal effort to build or purchase governmental stamps etc .
In almost all the countries of the world some special rights are provided to the members of parliament and cabinet .
These special rights prevail since 1883 in our administration system in one form or another .
After the implementation of Indian government regulation , 1919 , these special rights were recognized .
With the amendment of Civil code mechanism in 1925 , the members of parliament and cabinet were freed from arrest in civil affairs .
The freedom of expression was established in 1629 in England .
This freedom was decided after sir John Elliot ` s matter .
By Indian government regulation , 1919 it was implemented in India but the parliamentary committee were not given the freedom of expression .
This provision was made by the Indian government regulation , 1936 for the committees .
The right to this expression has also been given to the members in free India .
No action can be taken by any court against on the basis of anything said or belief in the Parliament and any of its committee .
There are no kinds of binding on the speech or work of members of the parliament or legislature .
But this freedom doesn ` t mean that the members should talk and act as they like .
This freedom has been controlled on the basis of carriages of the parliament and some rules .
The freedom of arrest-Under this special right during the parliament session or 20 days before it , the members can not be arrested in civil affairs .
The members have the right to get immediate information related to the arrest , imprison or release .
Without the prior information of the chairman the members can not be arrested in the `` premises `` .
The Parliamentarians have the freedom from the ill behavior of the Police from the point of letting them do their work without any interruptions or barriers .
The attack on members while going or coming for discharging Parliamentary responsibilities is also an abuse of special rights .
Publication of parliamentary proceedings - No civil or criminal case can be filed on any individual on the right publication of the proceedings any of the Houses of Parliament .
Therefore while publishing the report of the activities of the Parliament , accuracy , completeness and fairness should be taken care of .
Publishing the Parliamentary action by breaking - distorting it or by putting inappropriate and disturbing comment is a matter of special right ` s abuse .
Personal allegations on a particular member because of personal malice , spiteful comments on his conduct is a breach of special right .
Every published paper should clearly mention the printer , the publisher and the place of publication .
The printer can publish the paper after the prior permission of district president and divisional magistrate .
There should be mention of the owner of the paper and its editor on every volume of the paper .
The announcement letter will also be canceled if the paper is not published within a year .
If the announcement letter of any paper has been canceled then he is liable to appeal within 60 days from the date of cancellation , not after that .
One copy of every published paper must be sent free of cost to the registrar and two copies to the state government .
In a situation of not observing the press rules , the editor and the publisher can get the penalty of two thousand rupees and six months punishment .
Feeling the need to maintain the authenticity of press freedom and reform in the level and development of news committee Press Council Act was passed in 1978 by the Indian Parliament .
Under this regulation there was an announcement of electing one chairman and 28 members in the framed council .
An outline was set to give appropriate representation to the other 28 members of various categories .
13 members from labor journalists .
six of them from the editors of newspapers and the remaining 7 members apart from editors .
6 members engaged in newspaper management or profession , electing two members each from small and medium category managers .
One member from amongst relevant news committee people .
Three members from areas like education and science , law , literature , culture etc .
One from University grant commission , one from Bar council and another from literature academy .
Five members are elected from the parliament , from which the nomination of three members are done by the chairman of House of commons and two by the chairman of the senate .
The council has all the right to consider those complaints which implies that if a newspaper , committee , editor or journalist has dome any thing against the code of conduct which harms the honor of this profession .
Secondly the council takes its decision after giving the paper its right to put the whole matter and if the complaint is right the concerned side is penalized .
It is remarkable that the Council has has no right to consider the pending cases of the court .
Indian proprietary law is basically framed to protect the interests of writers and publishers .
Publishing any part or section of a work or publishing an author ` s work without his prior permission is considered to the violation of this law .
Indeed any art produced by , labor , intelligence has been provided statutory recognition under copyright law .
The editors of news papers and journalists should be very careful in this direction .
While the law does not apply to news proprietary work .
The duty of the newspapers is to provide news .
Yet the the style of news presentation and originality of word choice can automatically save one from the clutches of the law .
This law does not apply to public speeches of politicians .
Yes , this Act may apply to articles and pictures published in the news papers .
In 1984 two significant amendments were made in the Indian copyright law .
The first amendment was done by adding a new section 19-A to the Act .
Another major revision in copyright was related to the prevention of thefts of law books , smuggling and counterfeiting .
It is often observed that fake and counterfeit books are printed at international and national level .
For this reason the author has to suffer the loss of royalty and the government has to suffer the loss of tax .
For the prevention of this nature there was a provision of special punishment in this law .
For this offense an imprisonment of six months to three years ` and a fine of 50 thousand to 2 million has been fixed .
Right after the seizure they have to submit it before the magistrate .
Copyright abuses have now been declared as economic crimes .
A law related to the job of working journalists , hours of operation , payment of gratuity was built in 1955 .
Under this law , the editor , news editor , sub editor , feature writer , reporter , corespondent , cartoonists , news photographers , proof reader etc related to the job of Journalism have been provided recognition as the working journalists .
People working in the Complete establishment and administrative and supervision tasks were not considered to be in the category of working journalists .
The working Journalists can not be bound to work for more than 140 hours in four consecutive weeks .
24 hours of continuous rest must be given in a period of every seven-day .
The Act also has a provision that the working journalists will also get the benefit of proposed leaves and casual leave in addition to accrued leave and sick leave .
The Press notice of the reporters approved by the State or Central Government that are supposed to be published in India will not be stopped .
If they are not prohibited under this subsection .
In article 325 of the Public emergency of this regulation of the constitution emergency is not mentioned .
It includes the prevention of rumors that provoke unrest and spread its influence in a particular area or in other areas .
Shri R . C. S government does not follow any kind of bond on the the freedom of expression of this act and says after reading the subsection it becomes clear that the powers given to the government are not free , there are various control on it .
Firstly , the use of this right can be in the favor of public emergency and public safety .
Secondly , this right can only be used by the government or authorized officer who are clearly mentioned in this subsection on certain basis .
According to the article 20 of this act sending undignified and vulgar things through post has been prohibited .
Because of Indian Postal line -LRB- amendment -RRB- bill 1986 there has been quite a dispute .
Article 16 of this bill , amending the said article provides extensive rights to the government .
Some more reasons of opening and stopping the letter has been added in this amendment .
May 30 , 1826 , is a significant point in the development of Hindi journalism because on the same day first weekly paper ` Udant Martand ` was published in the consummation of Shri Yugal Kishore shukl .
The primary condition for revolution : ideological freedom - the first condition to maintain the freedom , integrity , sovereignty and universality of a nation is the freedom of idea-expression .
World - History is witness to the fact that Mdandh and Sattalolup dictators at first axed the freedom of expression in order to maintain their power .
Napoleon was not so scared of the four battalions as he was of the four opposition newspapers .
After the establishment of British power in India the then government clearly felt the power of pen .
That is why the development of free Journalism in India had to face the tough control of the British government since the beginning .
It was the result of indomitable will and dedication of the Indian Journalists that despite struggling with various problems like subjugating policy , governmental custody and lack of encouragement , economic crisis , limited resources , less number of customers etc he gave a healthy direction to journalism .
The then journalists and Journalism was dedicated towards achieving the great objectives of motherland service and refinement of Public interest .
The history of the then Journalism is literally the history of national movement .
Mahatma Gandhi believed that the first objective of news paper is to understand and express the wishes and ideologies of the citizens , second objective is to arouse desirable feelings in public and the third objective is to courageously put up public fallacies .
By targeting the importance of journalism while Indra Vidyavachaspati has considered it `` the most influential invention of the present age `` , Satyadev Vidyalankar has revealed its usefulness by considering it as the `` fifth Veda `` .
After looking at the freedom movement of India it becomes clear the then Indian journalism was breathing in various problems and rounds of threats .
That was the era of struggle . sacrifice , austerity and nation ` s love of Indian Journalists .
Our Journalist dedicated towards high ideals were successful in keeping their independence , impartiality and objectivity despite limited resources .
It would be no exaggeration if we say that one foot of the former editors and journalists remained in prison and the other at the newspaper office .
There are three major duties of the magazines apart from fulfilling the objectives of public interest , nation building , public welfare . They are presenting public opinion , preparing public opinion and directing public .
We have no hesitation in saying that the mass-media before independence have totally came up to the expectation .
The great responsibility that ` Udant Martand ` had undertaken by freeing the Indians from slavery and provided a free vision got more powerful and motivated by the upcoming magazines and Journalists .
While the papers publishing now prepared a ideological background initiating the tunes of freedom , the script of Hindi and Devnagiri also got encouraged .
Azimulla Swatntry Khan , the leader of the Freedom movement published `` Payame Azaadi `` from Delhi on February 8 , 1857 .
At first this magazine came in Hindu-Urdu but soon it came up in Hindi .
There was an opinion to come up with its volume in Marathi in Jhansi .
It was such a big fire which blew the voice of freedom in public with its sharp and illuminating speech .
This magazine that was short lived aroused such a fire in the then environment that British government got nervous and it did not leave any stone unturned to stop this magazine .
Anyone who had the copy of this newspaper was tortured .
This magazine that set the tunes of freedom wrote clearly on the contemporary conditions and courageously criticized the government policies .
Young revolutionary Mangal Pandey was hanged on April 8 , 1857 .
`` Bharat Mitra `` clearly declared that ` news paper is the representative of the people . .
The papers of this era were devoted to this purpose .
Pandit Durga Prasad Mishra , the editor of `` Uchit Vakta `` who considers the destiny and misfortune of India to be his own destiny and misfortune remind their sense of duty to the then journalists said , `` native editors , bewar .
Dont get confused of your duties hearing the name of prison , it should not be a worry to get imprisoned while protecting religion and counseling the government .
It does not defame .
Before 1857 there was a feeling of patriotism in journalism but the Journalists then paid more attention in assessing the good and bad administration of the company but the magazines after 1857 clearly set the tunes of freedom .
He began the new cultural movement by giving the leadership to the manpower .
Bharatendu gave a new direction to Hindi journalism .
Now the development of political consciousness in public had become relatively high .
The news published in the magazines began being criticized .
The magazines of this time were specially conscious towards the elevation of castes .
Bhartendu directly or indirectly contributed in the publication of about 25 magazines .
Bhartendu has the credit of beginning the indigenous movement .
Speaking about the contribution of Bhartendu in Indian national movement Dr . Ram Vilas Sharma said that as the Congress had begun the indigenous movement lawfully , the Bang - breach movement was born .
Bharatendu had started the indigenous movement in Hindi long ago .
Later in 1885 Hindi daily `` Hindosthan ` was published by Raja Rampalsingh .
Pandit Madan Moham Malviya was its first editor .
Further after getting the support of senior journalists like Pratap Narayana mishra , Balmukund Gupt , Gopalram Gahmari , this magazine while at one place has set new achievements it also accelerated the Indian national movement .
Indian journals also strongly condemned it saying it was a hard blow on the national intere .
Because of this act of the government Shri Balmukund on October 21st 1905 wrote in ` Bang Vichhed ` a volume of ` Bharat Mitra ` that because of Bengal dissolution Indian citizens came more coser and started getting tied in a thread of unity .
Indeed in this era Journalism was a devotion not an instinct .
Journalism had not been commercialized .
That was a tough path by walking on which the the national leaders imbibed the ideals of nation ` s service and public service .
Any kind of external disturbance or inducement could not make them leave their path .
This was his only desire - The country should very soon see the beginning of independence .
The then journalists did not made journalism the medium of their shabby selfishness .
The youth of the country was completely dedicated towards the ` Purna Swaraj ` movement by aligning with Tilak .
The then journalists expressed the feelings of national love and loyalty prevalent in these youngsters of the country .
The activities of Tilak in freedom movement infused passion and enthusiasm in the entire environment .
The journal ` Swaraj ` publishing from allahabad in the edition of Shri Shantinarayan became the victim of government ` s anger because of its extremist ideology .
An advertisement of the editor beginning the voice of freedom was put up like this - `` An editor is required for `` swaraj `` .
Salary : two dry breads , a glass of cold water and 10 years of imprisonment for every editorial .
It is clear from the advertisement that the job of editor was full involved risks , there were many threats before him .
A glorious passion of achieving freedom in these lines of advertisement is clearly getting vocal .
In an era of various magazines-journals the voice of public propaganda aroused .
This journal also fulfilled its responsibility with full zeal with the medium of articles and poems filled with nation ` s pride .
A weekly journal named `` Abhyudaya `` issuing from Prayag on the day of Vasant Panchmi in 1907 had a remarkable contribution in the field of political awareness .
Its editor was Pandit Madam Mohan Malviya .
In 1909 the publication of Karmayogi began in Prayag .
This journal could sustain for nine months only but it made a special place in very less time .
Its editor was Pandit Sundarlal .
The journal was named `` Karmayogi `` inspired by Arvind Ghosh ` s ` Karmayoginah ` .
This weekly was the supporter of extremely extreme and revolutionary ideologies .
In the eyes of British government and officers , merely reading ` Karmayogi ` was considered to be a ` crime ` .
Many people had to leave their jobs only because they read `` Karmayogi `` .
The publication of weekly `` Pratap `` from Kanpur in 1913 was a significant event .
According to Vdyarthijee , `` Pratap `` was the memoir of Rana Pratap and memory of Arorajee Pratap narayan .
The first volume consisted of the articles on those two great men .
`` Pratap `` was the only journal that started the tradition of publishing news and complaints through the medium of letters .
The letters which were not published had `` will not be published `` written at the bottom of the column giving reasons citing the name of the author and his address .
Possibly ` Pratap ` was the first and the last journal doing this .
The entry of `` Pratap `` was barred in many provinces of the country because of its news and comments .
The publication of weekly Swadesh began from Gorakhpur in 1919 .
Gandhian era-Again a transition could be seen in the Indian politics after 1920 .
Now the thread of politics was in the hands of Gandhi , the worshiper of non violence .
He had seen an amazing dream of freedom with the power of non violence .
It seemed as if journalism was in the nerves and veins of Gandhi jee .
Gandhijee started the publication of a weekly paper `` Indian opinion `` in four languages on 4th June , 1903 in the very first volume of which six columns were published in Hindi , English , Gujrati and Tamil .
The names of Mansukhlal Najar and Madanjit were published as the editors of this journal .
They were the nominal editors .
Gandhijee had the responsibility of its editing .
Gandhijee decided to come up with a journal in 1914 after winning the victory of the rights of Indians in South Africa .
Finally the journals ` Young India ` , ` Navjeevan ` and ` Hindi navjeevan ` were named Harijan by Gandhijee .
Gandhijee substantially was among the masses as a cautious journalist through these journals .
He gave his best to send his ideologies to the people through these journals .
The personality of Gandhijee had done wonders on people and the energetic and freedom loving people of the country were ready to die on his single call .
While Gandhijee raised voice against the social evils and polluted traditions through journalism , he also gave the leadership to the ongoing movements of the country to break the shackles of subordination and momentum to the Satyagrah , noncooperation and quit India movement .
Sri Ram Chandra Sharma started a monthly ` Maharathi ` from Delhi in 1925 .
The editors of this journal were courageous enough to publish ` Maharathi ` as a daily journal without declaration .
` Maharathi ` kept on getting published as a daily journal for about nine months .
The struggle of police and ` Maharathi ` was quite long .
This journal was also popular because of its extremist ideologies .
The editor Sri Ramchandra got in imprisonment of nine months for an article published in the daily `` Maharathi `` on 20th November , 1930 in the memory of Lajpat Rai .
Shri Krishnadatt Paliwal the disciple of Shri Ganesh shankar Vidyarthi published the weekly Sanik from Agra .
This journal played a significant role in alerting and inspiring the people of Uttar Pradesh towards freedom movement .
The uprising of Yashpal was also a revolutionary journal .
The revolutionary stories and articles of Yashpal shook the walls of British empire system .
The publication of this journal published from Lucknow since October , 1938 was detained in 1940 because of high rate of bail being demanded by the British government .
The way the then journals showed their sense of responsibility in the freedom movement is commendable .
The publication of `` Ranbhery `` is significant among them .
Finally on 15th August , 1947 that golden morning came - We breathed in free India , after freeing ourselves from ages of slavery we took the vow of maintaining the nation building , national unity , integrity and sovereignty of the country .
The dream of freedom came true because of the irresistible sacrifices and efforts of the national leaders , revolutionary sons , journalists , editors , patriots and public .
It is necessary to think about the names of journals published during freedom movement .
The consciousness of our latent heart starts resonating after reading these names .
A power , courage , faith and belief is associated with these names .
These names themselves keep clarifying their objectives and aims .
While ` Yugantar ` signifies the change in era , ` Karmaveer ` inspires to move ahead in work .
While `` Swaraj `` and `` Swatantra `` dream of independent India , `` Sainik `` gives the message of faith and power like a soldier .
These journals fulfilled their responsibilities in the freedom movement in three ways - -LRB- A -RRB- Glorious song of the history of Indian culture , -LRB- B -RRB- portraying the current situation , -LRB- C -RRB- dreams of a golden future .
According to these aspects it can be said that the then journals made a meaningful effort of exciting the feelings of the people as per the need of the hour .
While some national journalists were being honored in other languages , the former journalists were being away from journalism one by one .
a new generation stepped into journalism .
This new generation had participated in the fight for swaraj and learned to do work in scarcity and problems .
The journalism before freedom did not let capitalism and the state makers overpower them .
Public concern was the primary objective of the then journalism .
In fact the big bourgeoisie families had started surrendering before the newspapers some time before independence .
Big Press organizations like Times of India , Statesman , Indian Express , Hindu and Hindustan Times came up with big capitals .
During the same time in the reign of Indira Gandhi , politics and journalism came closer to each other .
The process of politicization of journalism began .
Now the objectivity of the journalists was motivated by party politics whose ultimate culmination is visible in the emergency time .
The freedom of expression of press was curbed .
Now news started appearing as `` Censor `` .
Language became dual , diplomacy started coming up .
Such a language was used which could be molded as and when it was required .
As Khushwant says `` the intellectual section changed into call girl `` .
Journalists became habituated to government facilities .
Newspapers like `` Indian Express `` were an exception .
Political drama started revolving quickly in 1977 with the change of power .
Indira came back in 1980 and a new flow is seen in the Hindi journalism till the rise of Rajiv Gandhi in 1984 .
Doordarshan had shown its magic by this time .
Color television entered during Asiad with which the image of journalism started increasing .
More and more pictures were included in newspapers .
Now journalism had become ` business ` .
Before this the newspaper organizations brought newspapers for `` power `` but the owners of newspapers gave a new direction to the production of newspapers by bringing new machines and new technique .
The cost of newspapers started increasing .
Dependence of advertisement began in order to fill the loss of income due to cost incurred and the selling .
The priorities of newspapers changed due to dependence on advertisement .
During the same time in 1982 , Rajendra Mathur a renowned journalist of Hindi took over the job of being the editor of `` Navbharat Times `` leaving `` Nayi Duniya `` .
In the editorship of Prabhash Joshi in 1983 Express group restarted the newspaper `` Jansatta `` .
These two newspapers contributed amazingly in political and literary journalism .
English newspapers were considered to be `` snobs `` .
The news of great writers of Hindi was irrelevant for them while the statement of lousy leaders became top stories .
Today the objective is to earn profit .
The reason behind this is the beginning of some undesirable traditions .
Business , marketing , consumerism , sensationalism , obscenity , copying the western media , ignoring national and cultural values has become common for the Indian Press .
Today there is lack of integrity towards the facts amongst the journalists .
The reason behind this trend is the consideration of media as a business .
The owner of the Press to the reporter is affected by the market culture .
60-70 % space of the journals is covered by advertisements , while some of the reports are published only for the advertisements .
It is heard that if anyone has to get any news published in the newspaper then he can do so with appropriate person ` s contact or appropriate rate .
It is the most unfortunate situation .
Today the newspapers primarily contain subjects like sexual relationships , adolescent age sex , dating , homosexuality etc . .
They are doing the significant work of educating and informing the people on significant issues .
They give specially cover on the events along with the officials in order to educate the people on the occasions of human caused disasters and natural disasters .
They also give the far flung news at personal and organization level apart from the news of economic development due to governmental efforts .
There is a lot of increase in awareness due to such kind of journalism .
The last decade of this century is dominated by the electronic media and its development is sustainable .
There is a situation of crisis before the print media .
Electronic media is not able to compete with the print media .
But still print media is more powerful because electronic media is only giving messages .
Therefore the scope of print media has not ended .
Even after the expansion of media there is both scope and need for the development of print media of regional and local level because they only can protect the benefits of people in common .
But it is evident that there is change in both the structure and concept of print media .
Watching this will definitely be interesting .
Electronic media is satisfying the viewers more after it has become audio-visual .
Today there are 24hour news channels .
In order to handle these situations newspapers made various changes in itself .
Today the influence of electronic media can easily be judged by looking at the main page of national daily .
Almost all the newspapers have changed their structure .
Print media faced a threat before the arrival of television . A similar challenge is faced by the television with the arrival of internet .
While telecasting news the makeup of news , the makeup of the news reader , coordinating visuals etc takes some time but news on internet is very quick .
Now the print media has also issued its net edition looking at the popularity of internet .
Today the net edition of any newspaper can be read anywhere in the world .
Thus there are thousands and lakhs of people who amongst the numbers of newspaper customers who read newspaper on net .
The increasing number of the customers of newspaper like `` Dainik bhaskar `` is an example of `` good marketing `` .
The emphasis that is being given on consumer profile , feedback etc is more than what is being given to maintain the level of reporting .
Electronic media came with the arrival of radio .
A new dimension was added to the field of journalism when television was invented .
Doordarshan which means people can face to face see a sight or an event that is miles away .
First Printing Press and then radio .
Our tradition has been to pay more attention to what is seen than to what is heard .
There revolution in journalism with the arrival of television .
Now along with audio , precisely the same picture of that event , thing or situation could be sent or received .
Listeners and viewers also got the benefits of visuals along with audio in order to understand a particular news or knowledge of a particular event .
It was possible to see the things about which we could only hear .
It is a scientific truth that the effect on our mind while doing a work will be as much powerful and everlasting as many senses are involved in doing it .
It also applies for television .
While at one place our sense of hearing remains alert and the details of an event reaches our brain through sound , eyes also send the picture and figures of that event to our brain .
Many years ago the meaning of news was politicians inaugurating any program , politicians giving speech .
With the arrival of `` aajtak `` channel in 2000 the style of presenting news completely changed .
Indian viewers were amazed by the way `` Aajtak `` did the manifestation of the wonderful style of reporting .
looking at the success of `` aajtak `` various national news channels came up whose number has today turned 15 .
The 24 hour formula that Aajtak had made was used so enormously that it was scuffed .
New strategies were started being used to move ahead of each other .
But it is not the same with every channels .
There is rush to add spice and present crime and glamor news in an entertaining way .
Some are making sensations with loud getup while others with loud voice and some have appointed a lady anchor for a crime program .
In an era of competitions Doordarshan news has also reformed and changed its structure .
But despite new faces , new getup , new set , huge lighting arrangements the prime motive that Doordarshan has saved is-the interest of people .
Almost every big newspaper and magazine is in the ambush of coming up with group video magazine .
While `` Newstrack `` of India today group created a splash in video journals , observer news channel coming in two languages of observer group also tried to establish its feet .
Not only I TV and H TV but small groups also came down in this field .
Kaalchakra is also remarkable in Hindi .
By the lively telecast of the popular bay war of 90s , CNN sent the war to people ` s bedrooms .
Now the public liked more of watching news than listening it .
Five minutes view could satisfy more than reading the whole page content .
These video journals identified this instinct of the people and became busy in getting its benefit .
The beginning of video journalism in India is believed to be July , 1987 .
One after another video journals kept coming .
Second upsurge of women journalist came up during 70s .
A large number of women have entered the mainstream of journalism .
Up till now women were restricted only to female magazines like `` Femina `` etc .
But during 70s women associated to national newspapers with new energy , new passion .
The year 1975 was declared to be International women ` s day by the United nations which had deep impact on the women of the whole world .
How could the women of India remain untouched with this .
Like other fields women also entered into journalism .
These women journalists turned towards brave and risky reporting .
They compelled the managers with their hard work so that they build their opinions about women journalists in a new way .
Vidya Bal of Pune , joined the post of assistant editor in the journal `` Stri `` .
Lata Raje joined `` Loksatta `` newspaper in 1966 .
In 1969 Nilam Upadhe joined `` Maharashtra Times `` after being trained from `` The Times of India `` .
A large number of journals came up in the market during 1980s because of which the scope of jobs for journalists increased .
Most of these journals were women dominated .
During this time a large numbers of women began work as journalists in these journals .
Most of them have gained popularity today .
`` Women security Force `` was established in 1986 by the central police force which was sent to Srilanka .
They showed their courage there .
By the end of 20th century young women stepped into journalism in large numbers .
Its aptitude was more towards electronic media than print media .
Up till now women were associated with journalism in big cities only but before the advent of 21st century there was increase in the number of women journalists in small cities also .
Today women have reached many senior and significant posts like management editor , joint editor , local editor , assistant editor , main corespondent , news editor .
Some are regularly writings columns while others are special correspondent .
The women journalists of electronic media have not gained as much prestige as the women journalists of print media .
Now during the Kargil war , Barkha Dutt of Star news showed the courage that she has inherited from her mother Prabha Dutt .
It should be noted that Prabha Dutt is one of those popular women journalists who came during 70s .
According to Shri J Mansfield , `` in a newspaper ` s office , the room of editorial section is such a room where rumors of the whole world take place .
Editorial section is the only section that is always active .
The news , article , feature , cartoon , picture etc that the readers get to see or read in newspapers is presented by the editorial section itself .
The reason is that this department is directly in touch with the readers .
Other departments like advertisement , circulation department have significance only after this department .
Newspapers can make its space amongst the newspaper readers only with the competency of the editorial department .
That is why editorial department is considered a significant section in newspaper world .
apart from the editor there are other journalists in the editorial department .
The person who directs and inspects the editorial work is called an editor .
Pandit Makhanlal chaturvedi while giving speech as the chairperson of second editors conference gave the titile of unsolicited or volunteer to the work of an editor .
According to his words , `` By being an editor in a way we carry the fast of serving right from an individual to the entire society and from a village and state to the entire county , which can only be fulfilled by the feeling of tenacity and feeling of sacrifice .
According to the experienced journalist late Vishnu Dutt . `` the work of an editor is like a commander `` .
It is the prime duty of the editor to run the newspaper as per the policies that are decided by the coordinating committee .
The was dedication of a editor is towards the coordinator and an editor can do no such work which harms the coordinator or the benefits of the journal .
The editor also has to be conscious of the likes , dislikes , complaints , suggestions etc of the readers of the newspaper .
With reference to the freedom of Press , it is the duty of the editor to keep the Journal free from any kind of pressure .
Newspaper is equal for everybody .
The place of news should always be near and approachable for everybody .
Editor only has the responsibility of giving the hidden information and the effect on the morality of the society by news compilation , edition and presentation .
Many journals have coordinating editors and many have joint but the job of both of them is to help the editor in his work .
The coordinating editor also gives direction to the reports sent by the outside reporters apart from giving information .
The relation of assistant editors is not with the news but the ideas .
Their work field includes lead articles , editorial , relevant review of significant national-international events , presenting the details of social , cultural and literary activities .
It will not be an exaggeration if we say that they put arguments related to the policy principle of the journals apart from the path demonstrator of public .
News editor is the backbone of newspaper .
The prime responsibility is of the news editor .
Ranging from giving the duty to the helpers of editorial department in different shifts to the responsibility of every news published in all the volumes is with the editor .
Special corespondents have communicate with the ministries and the parliamentarians .
President , Prime minister or any other significant person is on foreign visit then the special corespondent gets the chance to go with them .
Sub-editor is the unknown warrior of the newspaper .
Public knows the editor , it also very well knows the corespondents of the newspaper but it knows very little about the subeditor who works hard the whole night to prepare the newspaper for the readers in the morning when everyone else is asleep .
UNI and PTI news agencies give news in English only .
The deadline is fixed in a newspaper ` s office and there are many such news which has to be translated immediately .
For this the subeditor has to have good knowledge of English and the language in which it is to be translated .
The subeditor competes with the time and wins it .
He is a gardener who gives the shape of a beautiful garden to the forest of news coming in the newspaper office .
He decorates the structure of newspaper the way a bride is decorated .
Newspapers owe to the individuals who work in an unknown way and everyday make the newspaper attractive .
The major work of the corespondent is to collect the news with zeal and to make it understandable with clarity and perfection .
The final and significant series of editorial department is proofreader .
The job of a proof reader is extremely important .
Apart from the knowledge of language a proofreader should also have general knowledge .
Copy holder reads press copy and researches according to the proof reader but because of the newspapers being online a single person handled lots of work .
The job of edition comes after the choice of news .
The job of edition is as risky as it is responsible .
While choosing the news it is essential to take care of the place , importance , time and consequences .
Corespondents and dialogue committees of the newspaper write and send news according to them .
The person who edits news presents it in such a manner by correcting the language that the readers receive it easily .
All this should be taken care of while editing .
The introduction of the news should be influential and such that it can be given an attractive title .
The classification of news ` s introduction is not an easy work because news can be of various kinds and so do their introductions .
The manuscript that is received for edition is called `` Copy `` in the language of Press .
Whatever is written and edited in the ` Press copy ` should be done in clear words .
The signs of editions should also be clear .
If there are spaces in between the ` Press Copy `` then it should be edited otherwise towards left to right .
If the editing in ` Press copy `` is so much that the compositor is unable to read it then the edited construction should be self written in clear words .
The main edited ` copy ` should be diagonally cut and attached with the clear ` copy ` so that further inaccuracies should be matched with the main copy .
If there are today , tomorrow and day after tomorrow in a `` press copy `` then don ` t forget to write the date and day in brackets .
Sometimes various forms of a single event comes up while editing .
When the sources of news change the forms also change .
In such a situation we should pay more attention to the factual truth of the event .
The facts is sacred for the journalist , not the opinion or ideas .
Remember you can not make any kind of changes in the facts .
Priority should be given to the facts , ideas and opinions come later .
While editing the news there are various news which are related to some previous event .
Therefore do not forget to give signal to remind the reference before news .
The choice and principle of editing news is same for every news .
While editing the news received through post these points should be kept in mind - significance of an event , local importance , indigenous color , odor of personal fame-defame , unity of language , limited place .
It is essential to remain alert while receiving news through post because they are not corespondent trained and neither their language has expertise .
Many times the news received through post has the odor of irresponsibility of facts , allegation-counter allegation , fame-defame etc for which one should be careful .
Mostly the postal and regional edition of the news are published .
The significance of regional news is regional therefore they are given space at the regional page .
Sometimes the regional news are so important that they are placed at the front page so that everybody gets to know about them .
According to the famous literary figure of America Mark Twain , `` It is the first duty of the newspaper that it should look beautiful , the second is to speak the truth .
Beautification is the influential medium to enter the heart and brain of a person .
The best of the best things do not appeal if presented haphazardly .
But if the matter is published in an interesting way then it will be a reason of discussion .
Actually the news and ideas are significant in a newspaper .
Newspaper contains many kinds of news .
How they can be put on the same space so that they attract the readers apart from satisfying them .
This is the success of newspaper , this work can not be possible without influential beautification .
The work of page beautification begins after correcting all the mistakes in the composing department and sent to their bromide main subeditor .
The main subeditor or the person who has to get the page done , at first sees which page has how much space .
Apart from the news being significant , the pictures are also important .
Picture is a news in itself .
The practical experience of makeup with complexity is feasible .
Any kind of hanky-panky with the permanent columns of the first page of the newspaper such as market value , weather , cartoon etc or changes in its location at any cost can not be done .
Thus no kinds of changes are possible in the place that is decided by the advertisement department for an advertisement .
There is a fixed timing for the arrival of a dummy from the advertisement department .
Because only after the arrival of the dummy one can get to know what space is left for the news .
If the dummy does not arrive at the right time it can not be clear as to how much space is left for the news .
Further the main sub editor tells the subeditors that how much news is to be taken from the news agencies .
It should also be kept in mind that the news that whether the news that is being collected from the news agencies is sent by the correspondent or not .
Whenever all the news , cartoon , article , advertisement etc get ready they are decorated on the pages and this process is known as `` Makeup `` .
Beautification is also an art and it has also transformed with time .
Previously blocks were made for the titles but now since 2000 computer decorates the page .
Apart from facilities it also saves time with which there is a benefit that if there is a news which has to be brought necessarily then the subeditor can immediately edit that news .
Which kind of type is used for the first , second and third lead can be done in a flash of seconds by it .
With the arrival of computers the title can be make small or big while creating the page , if there is something to be added or cut in the newspaper , that can also be done very easily .
Those who covered most of the news in the main sub editorial page was considered to be skilled .
The main subeditor today presents news in such a way that the readers do not find it a burdensome job but read it with interest .
The tactics that was adopted previously to reform such news are not used today .
Now the work of page creation is done on the computer itself thus the main subeditor can present the news as he desires .
Changes are also required in the makeup of the page .
A similar kind of makeup should not be repeated .
The paper seems to be boring it the makeup is repeated .
Today there is competition amongst all the papers as to who attracts its readers most .
There are news experiments being carried everyday for this .
The first page of most of the newspapers consists of first column , top stories , summary of the news , weather , cartoon and feature etc .
Further , three columns contain lead , three or two columns contain pictures and the rest columns contain significant news .
It is not necessary that the lead will be given in three columns everyday , it can also be of two ot four columns .
Due to makeup while the the reader is deprived of the significant news the paper also remains behind in competition .
Thus one should should refrain oneself from unnecessary makeup .
Makeup is not journalism but an integral part of it .
Makeup is not only decoration but an influential medium of transmission .
The purpose of makeup is to make the newspaper beautiful and attractive and it is also saves the time of editorial department , and it makes the reading easy for readers .
Preparing dummy facilitates in the presentation of news .
Things such as which news is to be taken from the local correspondents , special correspondents and agencies should be clear .
It facilitates in page creation and also helps in knowing about the news as to which news will go where .
Even before the page creation the main subeditor has to face many challenges .
there is lack of time , the decision should be taken in whatever time is there .
If some big leader or personality dies in an accident or is in a situation of dying then the main subeditor should be alert towards such works .
Newspapers are newspapers and one should be prepared for every news come as and when it comes .
After making the dummy the main subeditor should immediately talk to his co sub editors , foreman of press so that the news that has to come by fax should be composed .
If a paper is able to make its place among the readers then only because of powerful and alive editorial .
The number of network increases with news but editorial increases the popularity of newspaper .
Lead articles . editorial articles and letters of readers are published on the editorial page .
Pictures or cartoons were not used on this page previously but according to the article they are started being used .
Advertisements are also not given on this page because advertisements affects the dignity of the editorial .
Economic page is directly related to the economy of the country therefore this page has its own significance .
Pictures related to business are also used on this page .
Last page of most of the papers contain sports related news .
After the first page , last page is considered to be important .
There are two pages for sports in some papers and columns for sports specialists .
But because of tough competition amongst the papers the structure of this page also keeps changing .
The last page of some papers are made sports page while some papers give feature and entertaining things on this .
The makeup of this page is also being made attractive , colorful pictures are being used here .
Pictures play a significant role in the makeup of a newspaper .
Picture is able to say also those things which can not be explained in words .
The choice of pictures can be a trouble for editor and main subeditor .
apart from pictures being brought by the photographer in newspapers , various agencies also bring pictures from the entire world .
While choosing pictures , pictures not only related to politics and politicians are given priorities but humanitarian aspect is also taken care of .
Pictures are only chosen by the editor , news editor or main subeditor .
While the news looks attractive with the picture it also increases its reliability .
After choosing the picture it is sent in scanning after mentioning the number of columns on it .
Its size can be increased or decreased according to its place while doing the page makeup .
Proof reader plays a significant role in newspaper , journals and book publication .
A good publication proves to be worthless unless there is a good proof reading of a matter to be published .
Due to the inaccuracies there is reduction in the reliability , use and honor of publication according to the reader .
Therefore there is arrangement for a proofreader in order to deal with the inaccuracies .
Under working journalist act , proofreader is also considered to be a journalist .
Therefore it is expected to give interest , knowledge , ability and efficiency .
The work of a proofreader is to correct the ` mechanical ` inaccuracies , not on the basis of self decision .
Wherever there is inaccuracy related to language , grammar or defiance of Press law or if anyone is being humiliated then it is the duty of the proofreader to inform the editorial departmet for necessary amendments .
The imprint of the composed matter that is taken for testing by the compositor is called proof .
The main purpose taking the proof is to know whether the composing is accurate or not , the xerox copy of composed matter is taken on proof machine or printing machine .
The process of getting the xerox or the thus received xerox copy is known as lifting the proof .
Where the proofreader given the direction to correct the marked inaccuracies through given signals .
There are proof reading departments in big newspapers but there is no separate arrangement for it in small newspapers .
In such a situation editorial department is given the responsibility of reading proof and the first gaily-proof is read by the proof reader and the final gaily-proof is read by the subeditor .
The proof reader should definitely correct grammar related inaccuracies but the original copy should not have any kind of changes .
If the changes are required then the concerned person should be made aware of it .
A good proofreader is one who correctly reads the proof .
A proofreader should also have the knowledge of composing then only he can know where space , margin , para , indent etc are required .
It is an era of computers , how could the newspaper world remain untouched from it .
Most of the newspapers have become Online .
The laser print of the news that come from the dialogue committees are taken out so that the subeditor can do its editing and proofreading on computers .
The news that comes from outside also come through E-mail therefore they also don ` t require to be composed .
Only article , feature , book review etc go to the composing department which is read by the proof reader .
The sub editor reads the article , feature etc on many newspapers and correctly edits it by reading it on computer .
Thus since when computers have come the requirement of gaily proof and pharma proof has stopped .
Check and see if the footnote number is on the same page as where the foot note is .
Please use acceptable words .
If the matter of one column is in another column and the matter of one page has been done in the makeup of another page the the sequence of should be fixed from the column or page of first line .
The correct use of full stop , comma , question mark , exclamatory signs should be there .
Sentence composition , fronting and backing of paragraph etc should also be seen by the proof reader .
The signs that signify inaccurate form are known as inaccurate signs .
The signs that signify accuracy are are known as rectification signs .
Such signs are used in the column which is left at the right or left side .
Therefore such signs are also known as `` Signs of Margin `` .
Apart from them there is a third method to use signs .
It is mostly used in newspapers .
This method is known as tracking .
In this technique the proofreader pulls the point of inaccuracy from left or right as per his convenience and takes it to the extreme and makes a sphere by mentioning the necessary sign .
When there are multiple inaccuracies in a single word then the whole word form is written in brackets .
The role of reporter is significant in newspapers .
The main job of reporter is to collect news and transmit it as per their significance .
Therefore a reporter is also called a corespondent .
A reporter not only collects the time to time events taking place everywhere but it also give a new dimension on the basis of presentation so that its readers can easily imbibe that dialogue .
If we look back to ancient times and see the legendary Indian saga then we can give the title of ancient reporter to maharshi narad in modern words .
Basically a successful reporter can not work until he doesn ` t take care of the past , present and the future .
Definitely he does not put his own opinion in any news but definitely he carefully observes the situation in which the news and ideas take birth .
We can also call it `` dialogue watching ` in one sense .
Therefore it is said that a reporter has comprehensive responsibility towards a society which he should not ignore .
The reporter who has sound knowledge about his subject and region is only a popular reporter .
Any reporter who has plenty of information and facts is undoubtedly honored amongst his readers .
He acts as a bridge between the government and common people .
He reminds us of its existence .
Therefore it is said that newspapers can not be imagined without reporters .
The changes in the society or in other words the events that we get to see are not centered on a single subject .
The size of the events are big and the kinds are new .
Definitely the investigation of these various events is done by a reporter .
When a reporter prepares a dialogue copy as per the nature or subject of the event we include it in various kinds of reporting and these kinds are extended from crime to culture and from education to sports .
Crime related news in any newspaper is seen with prominence .
While an old couple is strangulated to death in the sky high buildings of metros at other side criminals are killed by the bullets of the police in gang war .
When a reporter collects such news for his newspaper , we call it crime reporting .
Undoubtedly the correspondent has to have proper knowledge of law while reporting crime .
What is the provision for penalty or punishment under a cr e ?
He should have this knowledge .
A correspondent should be skilled in collecting and writing crime news .
Obviously the reporter should work in his limits taking care of the code of conduct .
A reporter has to contact the court , police station , hospital officials while collecting crime news .
A reporter should keep himself away from sensational elements while reporting a news related to crime .
They should not be charged by succumbing to emotions .
The major principle of crime reporting is that priority should be given to the details and talks of pros ans well as cons .
The words and facts given in the news should be tested and certified .
While describing a criminal or a crime committed by him a reporter should take care of courtesy and politeness .
If a criminal is providing a significant clue or information as a source then his confidentiality should be kept , it should not be made public in any situation .
Sports have definitely occupied a significant place in human life today .
They have become an integral part of our lives .
There was rarely a day spent when there was no sports competition held at any place .
One or two pages of every newspaper are reserved for sports news .
Separate channels for sports news are the reality today .
From ESPN to star sports on every channels there is 24 hour telecast of one sports or another .
Undoubtedly during 80s there was focus on the development of sports in India .
Asian games were held in 1982 in Delhi and then world level cricket and hockey competitions were started being organized .
All these sports activities played an important role in the development of sports reporting .
A reporter should be unbiased while reporting sports .
he should not write anything which shows malice or indifference towards a particular team .
As far as possible the sports reporter should enjoy the confidence of organizers , players .
Apart from that he should have detailed knowledge of the game that he is reporting .
His reporting would be languid and boring if he has no interest in sports .
Like the motion of sports , he also should have dynamics in his writings .
His words should be so graphic , powerful and effective that a reader must realize that he is fully engrossed into the sport .
There should be sensitivity in writings of a sports reporter so that the description of match should arouses excitement in the reader , listener or viewers .
Another specialty of sports reporting is that its style should be light but composed .
While writing sports news as compared to other news we also need to show the motion growing in the sports environment .
He should also have such reference materials so that he keeps complete knowledge of the records made in sports .
If a sports reporter has complete information about the players also apart from the sport then his reporting will undoubtedly be more lively .
Parliament , the highest institution of the country where discussion are held starting from the law of the country to its condition and direction .
Thus at the state level there are legislative assembly committees where legislators participate in the discussions regarding the state .
Parliament and assemblies decide the schemes that are made or should be made for the nation and common man .
Many a times there is a situation in the parliament or assembly when news are made specially ; for example there are always arguments between the government and opposition during the question session on the matters related to public interest .
Undoubtedly experienced reporters are sent for the reporting of parliament and legislatives .
These reporters generally get the status of special correspondent .
There are various limitations of publishing the proceedings here which should be obeyed by the correspondents .
According to the constitution the parliament and the legislative assembly has the right to partially or completely ban the publication of their proceedings by the newspapers .
Even if the proceeding is true or real the parliament has the right to put a ban on its publication .
The law of dishonor or disobedience is enforced on the reporting of parliament like the rest of the matters .
Therefore the correspondents should be careful about the honor and respect of the parliamentarians and legislative .
No bill or report of parliament should be published without prior presentation as the final news .
One should also know the process of asking questions by the members while reporting the legislative assembly .
Immediately after question session there is a zero hour in the parliament .
Here questions can be asked without prior information .
There is no special subsections for the the proceedings of this session .
During this the members ask questions and the concerned ministers of the ministry answer .
It is raised through ` stop work proposal ` for the demand of immediate discussion in parliament on a question of extreme sensitivity or public importance .
Mostly the speakers asks to remove some section or words of proceeding done during a parliamentary reporting .
The reporters should undoubtedly follow this order .
There is a new sight before us in the field of education .
Various kinds of education are being imparted through various mediums .
Not only educational activities but educational departments , colleges , schools , universities and concerned teachers and students come under education .
Today student union strikes could be seen on various issues in the universities .
The seminars or debate competitions organized in the universities are also a part of this reporting .
Today most of the newspapers not only keep a sharp eye on the activities of education world but they are also covered through the medium of correspondents .
It is essential for the education reporters to be in constant touch with the university campuses .
He should be aware of the everyday knowledge of the education world .
The most important thing is to maintain contact with the people of educational world , students , student unions or teachers union so that the news coverage is quick .
While most of the news published in daily newspapers are influenced by politics , from human interest subject news we take such news in which a reader sees simplicity , entertainment , surprise , mystery and excitement .
These news are uncommon and special as compared to the news that are published everyday .
They break the boredom of the readers that get bored from reading the the general news .
Human interest subject reporting can be done on any subject but it is necessary to have hum sensitivity in it .
While the correspondent should have language skills for writing such news , he should also have interest in various aspects of human life .
Mostly such news are seen published in boxes on various pages of newspapers .
They are kept in boxes because of their specialty .
The basis of Indian democracy is its unbiased election system .
From the chief of the village to the elections of the Parliament and legislative assembly are held in our country from time to time .
In our country in one state or another there are elections in form or another where billions of people participate and thousands and millions of workers accomplish the voting process .
Correspondents are specially put on duty to cover these elections .
During Parliament assembly elections generally newspapers increase their pages , two to four pages are dedicated to election reporting .
The most important thing while reporting elections is objectivity .
A reporter should be above party politics and true and factual reporting of the candidate of every party should be carried .
Biased news will not only tarnish the image of newspaper before the readers but the reliability of correspondent will also fall in crisis .
Public sentiments during election is very extreme thus such news should not be written that eliminates mutual brotherhood .
One should avoid detailed interpretation of castes , religions and particular community .
In fact most of the times caste , community etc is primarily published in order to make these news sensational but ultimately such news prove to be fatal for the entire society .
When a correspondent presents his analysis about a candidate , it should be based on facts .
Instead of table reporting , spot reporting should be given priority .
The news that is written for some particular event and subjects is called special reporting .
It includes protest , statements of major people , general meeting , severe crime , any auspicious occasion , sudden death of any honorable person , religion , festival etc .
A reporter has to go at the place of incident i . e . the spot for collecting these ne .
Thus news is put in two or three columns .
Because of their instantaneous effect these news are of special significance .
The writing style of such news is very easy .
They are written in everyday common speech .
Introduction and title are given more significance in such reports because a reader is able to decide to read or not to read such news only after seeing them .
They are known as investigative news that are acceptable in society due to the power of facts and influence as compared to common news .
With the publication of such news there becomes a situation of turmoil .
Obviously reporters do not get such news very easily as compared to the general news .
In order to get search news the reporters have to work quite hard .
Reliability of the reporter is the significant point in a search report .
Because of his reliability people hand him over confidential things which develops a situation turmoil after its publication in the form of news .
`` Tehelka scam `` can be a biggest example of search reporting because of which the chairman of the ruling party had not only had to resign but the person holding the responsibility of the defense ministry also had to resign .
For a search report the journalist needs to have immense patience and courage .
There was an immense hard work of Chitra Subramanyam , the reporter of ` the Hindu ` in making `` Bo force scam `` a search news .
While there is thrill in search reporting , it also has the strength of struggling with danger .
A brave reporter can only write in an innovative way about goons .
Thus a search reporter should have curiosity or in other words an ability to sniff like dogs so that he searches unusual stuff amongst the usual ones .
Authenticity is the other powerful aspect of search reporting .
If reporters don ` t have proof along with the search news nobody believes them .
Many news are so comprehensive in terms of size and influence that many news can be prepared on their various aspects .
In the process of these events apart from the background of the event , its scenario , many other aspects are considered and then it is given the shape of news .
We use explanatory style in such news .
Recently world trade center and Pentagon building in America were ruined by the terrorists .
There were so many aspects of this incident that an entire page news were published on its various aspects for so many days .
Undoubtedly under explanatory reporting a reporter not only takes its readers towards the background of incident but he also writes separate news for its various causes .
Thus while reporting such news a reporter should have information about various aspects of an event .
so that he can build a new image of those aspects through his language skills .
When the president takes oath along with his works the various aspects of his life should also be put before people .
News is a product as well as a point of view .
Like other products news is collected , developed , and decorated .
Then after it is sold through newspaper , radio , T . V , cable , internet .
Further news is also a perspective .
What people think , what they want , their interests , the expression of their perspective related to knowledge is also done through news .
Further , the point of view of correspondent and editor is also expressed through news .
Many times old incidents reiterate by taking a new form while at other times extreme and bizzare things happen .
According to N.B. Cs senior correspondent , John Chancellor the description of changes and struggle as per the date is called news .
According to some , whatever the reader wants to know is there is in the news .
According to the Indian journalist Chalpati Rao , the newsness of news is that when it gives the information of changes .
It should give information , political , social or economical .
In fact thousands and millions of events occur everyday but not every events become news .
For an event to become a news its reporting is essential otherwise that event just occurs , its information doesn ` t reach the people .
According to their needs the print and electronic media decides the event fit for reporting from these thousands and millions of events .
Although there is no scientific method to decide this .
In English it is said that News is new , i . e . it is essential for an event to be new to become a news .
Yesterday ` s news becomes outdated .
Therefore contemporary newness is the most significant condition of news .
When a reader reads an evening news or the next day news he expects to read something new from the previous day ` s newspaper .
News very soon becomes stale and the reader has no interest in reading that .
A reader is more interested towards a news when he associates with it .
Readers or viewers are more interested in knowing about their neighborhood , their city and their country .
Though many times psychological proximity is also significant such as the common Indians will feel more proximity with the Americans fighting with terrorist Taliban .
People ` s excitement will be as much as significant is the person present in the center of the event .
Apart from the politicians , players and film artists are also sources of news for media .
Even the past and present of infamous criminals are given much coverage by the media .
while deciding the news element , the influence and consequences of that news is also significant .
If the consequences of any event is able to bring a big change in political , social , economic , commercial and literary-cultural domain then its significance is more .
If there is an inclusion of feelings , happiness-sorrow etc . related to human interest then that incident touches the heart of common reader and it becomes a news .
When an incident goes beyond the bounds of normality i . e . become bizarre then it become news .
When something happens beyond status quo it becomes a source of news .
The objective of news is to give information .
Hard news - The center of such news is substantially the incident .
Which is explained in detail .
This news is based on the five Ws and one H described by Rudyard Kipling -LRB- what , when , where , which , who and how -RRB- .
Undoubtedly ` Hard News ` is primary in daily news paper .
Analytical news -LRB- Soft news -RRB- - Such types of news are increasing these days .
Actually the reason is that event specific news are not able to satisfy the readers totally .
The readers want to know the sequences behind the event .
The news that are of national significance are called national news .
Such news are generally published on the main page of the newspaper .
The news of international significance and the news of other countries also come under this category .
Such news are published on main page and also on `` World `` page .
Speculative news - The news that are expected to occur such as five year elections , republic day etc .
Non speculative news - Such news that are less likely to occur , they occur unexpectedly such as natural calamities , murder etc .
After collecting the dialogues , news writing is a significant task which requires art and skill .
Along with truth and clarity , objectivity is also significant for news .
No matter the news is related to which subject or region it should carry the information of five Ws and one H -LRB- what , when , where , who , how and why -RRB- .
Whether the news that has come in the form of an advertisement on the desk of the news editor or from a dialogue committee through teleprinter it is a raw material for the News room .
No matter whether the dialogue is written in a well mannered and correct way , it is the duty of the news room to check it , write the headline , lead and decide its place .
Headline writing is the most tough jobs amongst the all the directed works of the sub editor .
Because the headline plays a significant role in the popularity of a newspaper .
The reader reads the newspaper after being attracted by the headline .
Therefore the headline should be precise , lively and meaningful .
The line where the source of the news is mentioned is called the credit line viz . PTI , UNI , I . N . et .
It occupies a place before the lead in a news ` s framework .
Mostly the sources of these news are written in brackets with the date -LRB- date line -RRB- .
But if the news is special then the name of the news ` s author also goes with the news which is called the Byline .
The editor decides whether there will be a byline with the news or not .
All those facts , examples and events that has been referred in the lead are discussed in detail in the body of the news story .
The last two of the five Ws and one H i . e . ` how ` and ` why ` are significant in the solution body .
Lead plays a significant role in the framework of news .
The first paragraph of the news is called lead .
It is also called `` Intro `` or `` prologue `` .
After this as and when the new paragraphs are made , the matter discussed and pointed in the lead are explained there .
The climax in the play comes in the middle or after that but a news story begins with a climax .
The major things in the beginning of a dialogue - five Ws and one H and the style of giving further details is called `` Inverted Pyramid in English .
With reference to news it means the main information will go in the beginning and the most subsidiary information will go at last .
summary Lead-Such types of lead contain the summary of the news .
The length can vary from one to three paragraphs .
It includes five Ws and one H .
Its story composition is done in inverted pyramid style .
Capsule Lead - Such leads are given in news stories of historical significance which has a definite form and the size is short .
Such as - Madhav Rao Scindia died in an air crash .
Beginning from a part of quotation , announcement or speech is called quotation lead .
Punch Lead - When a particular point is given more preference as compared to the other details in a lead .
Cartridge Lead - It is an extremely short lead which has only one incident .
Narrative Lead - Although this lead is influenced by narrative style but the news reporter here doesn ` t put imagination and concentrates on facts .
The current newspapers do not depend on anybody ` s ideology or style .
Hundreds of people are engaged in news collection , writing and its editing who have vivid thinking and style .
But newspaper is a product which contains all these .
Therefore every newspaper has to depend on one or another style book so that there is a consistency in the ideas , Presentation and co-ordination of the news .
Style book contain rules related to copy writing and editing .
With the help of these directions the authors choose correct words with which there is a consistency in the newspaper .
The medium of expression of newspapers is language .
Though information of news can be provided by pictures through doordarshan but the use of language is compulsory .
Whether the news is printed or audio-visual , language is the only medium which is the most capable .
Although every newspaper has a specific reader section according to which its language content is decided , but still it is fixed that the language used in newspaper is framed keeping an extensive reader community .
Since the aim of newspaper is to send information to every section of community therefore the language of news should be such that it is understood by people in general .
According to the target readership also the difference in the level of language of characters is natural .
Language changes on the basis of literary , scientific , sports , economic subjects .
Metaphorical or figurative style is also not required in such types of news .
News agency is the institution that collects news and distributes it to its customers .
The major institutions of media such as newspaper , radio , television channel , website , political parties and big government offices are customers of these news agencies .
The correspondents of the news agencies collect the news and send it to their customers through teleprinter or computers and in return they receive a fixed amount of money every month from their customers .
News agencies work round the clock .
The news agency ` s nature of doing work is completely different from that of newspaper .
The work of the news agency is to collect and distribute news .
It doesn ` t publishes any of its news .
All the information and report are prepared and sent to the customers via . newspaper , radio , T . V . et .
Now it is the decision of the newspaper or radio  T.V whether it takes the news of one news agency or another .
The newspaper . V . etc decide as to how much part of which news should be published .
Every news of news agency mentions the source that is every news story is given by somebody while newspapers etc . do not mention sources .
The customers of news agencies include news journals of various political , social , economical ideology .
Therefore the correspondent of news agency should be objective and neutral while making news .
One can not put their opinion or explanation in that .
Thus the report of news agency is based on neutral facts while newspaper , journals , T . V . channels etc keep presenting their ideas , explanations in news because of their political , social , economic commitments .
Every second there is a ` deadline ` for the news agency .
The correspondent of the news agency has to finalize its report immediately while the pages are created till late in the newspaper therefore the correspondent of the newspaper knows how much time is left with him to file the report .
The truth and speed of news is compulsory for the news agencies .
The target section of a news agencies is not a city but the entire country and the World .
News agencies do not believe in publicity because of professionalism while newspapers promotes using all kinds of means .
Actually the thing is that newspaper is read in a particular city or its outlying areas .
The correspondents of newspapers can collect the news of city and surroundings but only this much isn ` t enough .
The reader also wants to know the news of other cities , countries and continents .
It is not possible for a newspaper to keep personal correspondents in all the big cities of the country and major cities of other countries .
since the dialogue committee sells news to all the newspapers of the country therefore it can appoint its correspondents in all the states and major cities of the country .
There is a tradition of appointing part time correspondents in towns .
Even if there are no correspondents in foreign it can get news from the news committees and give it to its customers .
More or less all the dialogue committees of the world follow the same pattern .
News shouldn ` t be one sided but multilateral that is the opinion of all the aspects should be included on any issue and the facts of both pros and cons should be taken .
One should refrain from suppressing the truth or publicizing lie .
The dialogue committee should send more and more news of all the regions .
Detailed news on all the subjects such as politics , economy , sports should be sent .
The journalist should take the decision of sending news like an impartial arbitrator or a judge .
Dogmatically the dialogue committee should keep its independence .
But they should not forget that the news sent by them reach the newspapers of various ideologies apart from all the governmental departments and radio doordarshan .
If there is no instance of objectivity then possibly it will affect the number of customers .
Both the major news agencies of India -LRB- PTI and UNI -RRB- are run by buying their share by the newspaper groups .
There are many board of directors in the newspapers and there is a chairman at the top of every board and he only makes the policies of the news agency .
There is constant competition between both the news agencies for giving better news service .
But the directors committee do not intrude in everyday policies of the news agencies .
The government has no right on these committees but the large number of present customers are also their masters .
The administration of the committee is done by the general manager or chief editor .
Generally there is only one person on both these positions .
General managers are there for its help .
Editorial desk is under the control of news editor while the reporting is under staff bureau chief .
Reporting staff are divided into two sections .
The first section is for those who report daily .
Above them are chief correspondent and the correspondents reporting the Parliament and ministries and at the top there is the bureau chief .
News agencies are generally the first one to reach early to any news because they have their headquarters in the capitals of the states , in the major countries of the world and United Nations .
Distinguished persons such as judges and senior government officers are included in the board of directors of Press trust of India .
General managers performs the everyday administrative and editorial responsibility .
He is the secretary of board of directors .
There are many editors for the help of general manager in big dialogue committees such as native news editor , foreign news editor , economic news editor etc .
Chief news editor looks after the central news room of the committee .
News from all the four sides comes to the Central news room .
There is also a pool desk in PTI where the news sent by the dialogue committees of third world countries come .
Apart from news PTI also prepares doordarshan programs and also runs photo service .
The editor or chief of these departments work in an independent way .
For the past few years PTI and UNI are also running Hindi news service .
The name of the Hindi news service of PTI is ` language ` and of UNI is ` Uivarta ` .
These Hindi services also do the translation of English news and a little bit collection of news .
There is a whole battalion of subeditors , correspondents and special correspondents in the headquarters of dialogue committees .
They have their regional offices in Delhi , Kolkata , Madras and Mumbai .
The major of regional office is called chief of bureau or regional manager .
There are various special correspondents and senior correspondents of these agencies in the capital .
The regional offices of dialogue committees are also there in the capitals of the states but their chief is of the level of special correspondent or news editor .
The chief of the metropolitan offices is of senior level .
Dialogue committees also keep their correspondents in foreign .
Washington , Moscow , London , Piking are significant from political point of view .
Correspondents are also hired from time to time at other places .
The dialogues sent by the correspondents from within the country and outside it are sent to the scattered customers after editing .
This work is done through teleprinter .
Like telegraph the postal department provides teleprinter service .
The conveyance of news has become easy because of computers .
Not all the news collected by the dialogue committee are sent to every customer .
The situation is same with PTI and UNI .
Those who give less subscription are given general service .
Under this all the significant news are provided to the customers in precise form .
There is also a special economic news service of PTI and UNI .
This service is provided to those newspapers who want to buy it separately .
The situation is same with feature service .
The subscription of every news service is separate .
The description of sudden death of whale at sea shore , rail accident or people being killed in air crash , these events are subjects of spot story .
These events are sudden therefore they are called spot story .
For the collection and writing of these news the correspondents of dialogue committee should have two special qualities .
Firstly there should be no error in the dialogue , secondly the description of event and place should be such that the reader could visualize the place of event .
Two things are essential for such news .
Firstly the correspondent should be present at the place of event and secondly he should immediately send the news by getting the dialogue written via . phone or sending by post .
The correspondents get the training of giving quick and true news from Police and court related news .
Sudden political news are generally sudden such as the resignation of a chief minister , minister , member of parliament of Prime minister .
In such situations the correspondents should immediately send the news via . phone or by post .
There are some consequences of such resignations and events .
The most challenging job for the dialogue committee is to write explanatory news about the political and diplomatic events .
Specially such dialogues concentrate on a single news .
And one has to talk to many people in order to explain them or search their meaning .
That explanation is written on the basis of talks with politicians , ministers , concerned government employees and diplomats .
The news of economic significance are written just like political news .
Such news should also be written with objectivity .
Information should be collected through various sources regarding the pros and cons of an issue .
Sports news are perhaps such that can be written with more freedom by the correspondents of news committee .
Firstly sports are generally not stranded in disputes secondly praising a good sports or sportsperson doesn ` t harm or benefit anyone .
It can be assumed that a correspondent doesn ` t use his pen with an unfair motive to put down or put up a person .
If nothing special is said during a speech or news conference then it will be a routine or general news .
Exclusive news is one that on other correspondent gets .
such news are received through various means - 1 . The correspondent reports the concerned incidents of the regions or ministries that he covers and he investigates them on time and thus gets unexplored news .
2 . When a correspondent frequently meets his sources and keeps querying then unexpectedly he gets such news .
3 . sometimes due to intimacy and mutual trust the correspondent gets news from his contact sources .
4 . Sometimes while investigating a dialogue a correspondent suddenly gets the source of some other news .
There are very few negative news but when found become top stories .
In the beginning the number of newspapers getting published from a single place was not more .
In the big cities there were only a couple of newspapers which were weekly , fortnightly or monthly .
But the situation completely changed in Europe after industrial revolution .
The number of newspapers increased due to increase in printing .
There aroused a feeling of competition as the number of newspapers increased and there was competition in giving the first news and more news .
since newspapers first came up in Europe therefore the development of newspapers was also very fast there .
European countries were making political settlements therefore newspaper became the significant means of getting the news of the country .
In the beginning there were no means of proving information quickly so information was sent through traditional communicative means using pigeons .
When postal system was invented then information began to reach via . post as soon as possible .
Further dialogue sender organization started emerging .
Wires were so enormously used that the news committee in some countries were started being called ` wire agency ` which is in fashion now .
Further the news received by news agency is called ` wire news ` .
In 1820 an organization named ` Association of morning newspapers ` was formed .
The newspapers had framed this organization on the basis of cooperation in order to collect the reports coming from Europe .
But the credit of the existence of modern news agency goes to french man Charles Augus .
He added many correspondents of European countries to his news agency and established a ` news bureau ` in France in 1825 .
Although the newspapers did not receive his services but the businessmen and diplomats began to receive the services of Charles Augus ` s agency .
Things turned on Augus ` s side in about two decades .
The Press became cheaper due to improvement in the technique of printing .
The newspapers who denied in the beginning to take Augus ` s news had now started buying Augus ` s news .
The proliferation of characters started increasing after the ban on stop duty in Britain in 1855 .
Newspapers started publishing in large numbers and Augus ` s agency became a hit .
From information gathering to information distribution , Augus used traditional means of communication .
He began the interchange of news through pigeons between Paris , London and Brussels since 1840 which he used to send through post .
The information from everywhere was sent to the Paris bureau .
It was translated and edited there .
Other countries started understanding the need and significance of news agency after getting inspired by the success of Augus ` s agency .
Bernard Wolf , an employee of Augus ` s agency started a news service named ` Wolf agency ` in 1849 .
Another German youth , Julius Reuter trained similarly in Augus agency opened an office in London for commercial news .
Apart from wire system he also used railways .
In the beginning the newspapers faced a lot of difficulty in making customers but gradually by 1858 a large numbers of newspapers of London had become its customers .
During the same time an institution was formed with the name `` harbor news association `` by the newspapers of New York in 1848 in America .
Agaas , Wolf and Reuters three major news agencies of Europe made an agreement to mutually help each other due to high demands of market and pressure of competition after which National New York Associated Press of New York also aligned with it in 1982 .
Reuters has done a significant work among the international agencies of news world .
Paul Julius Reuter will always be remembered for collecting news and sending it to people .
In 1915 a dialogue committee was formed in Germany under government control for the first time .
The major work of the dialogue committee named ` trans-ocean ` was to publicize war .
Soviet Union also framed a news agency as a spokesperson of communist government in 1918 which is known as ` Tass ` since 1925 .
After second world war almost all the countries framed their national news agencies .
United Press International -LRB- U.P. I -RRB- , Associated Press -LRB- A. P , Associated Press -LRB- a. P -RRB- , Agency France Press -LRB- A.F. P -RRB- , Reuters , I.N.S. , Tass etc are among the dialogue committees of international significance .
As the credit for the beginning of newspaper in India goes to an English James Augustus Hicky , similarly the credit for the beginning of news agency also goes to the English .
During the first decade of 19th century four major English newspapers were being published in India - Pioneer , Statesman , Englishman , Indian Daily news .
Among all the four newspapers of the supporters of British government , Pioneer had the dominance because Mr . Hansman of Pioneer was quite influential .
In order to compete with Pioneer -LRB- Cots -RRB- of Statesman , -LRB- Buck -RRB- of Englishman and -LRB- Dallas -RRB- of Indian Daily news together established a news agency with the name Associated Press of India -LRB- A.P. I -RRB- in 1905 .
They got the full support of Keshavchandra Rai , the leading journalist of India .
When Mr . K. C . Rai was refused to make its director then Mr . Rai stopped supporting them and formed Press bureau with the help of Mr . Upanath Sen .
K. C . Rai was a person of immense talent from the point of view of sniffing news , receiving it through top sources and printing it .
The pillar of news agencies in India was set as a consequence of his efforts .
Therefore Mr . Rai is called the `` Father of News agencies `` in India .
It was because of the efforts of Mr . Rai that there was amendment in the Indian postal Act .
The contract of Reuters and P.T.I started supporting the British during Indian struggle for independence .
In order to handle this situation Mr . Sadanand formed `` Free Press Agency of India `` in 1927 .
F. P.I had to face many difficulties since the beginning because of nationalist perspective .
By the ordinance of May , 30 the newspapers who published the news of F.P.I were penalized .
The wires of agencies were also censored .
Sadanand did not lose hope despite adverse conditions rather faced it and started his morning daily with the name Free Press Journal .
Its publication was started from Bombay since June , 1930 .
F.P.I was closed in 1935 .
One more news agency was started from Calcutta in 1933 .
Its father was Mr . B. SenGupt who struggled against imperialism by establishing United Press of India .
U.P.I had to face financial crisis since the beginning .
Dr. Rajendra Prasad inaugurated its teleprinter in 1948 after independence .
There was tremendous increase in the efficiency of this agency by the combined support and inspiration of young Indian journalists and freedom fighters .
Reuters compromised with P.T.I on September , 1948 because of Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel and A.P.I was purchased by Indian newspapers .
P.T.I was registered as an institution on August , 1947 and it started functioning formally since February 1st , 1949 .
Under the agreement with Reuters , P.T.I worked for 3 years in partnership and finally in 1951 P.T.I made its own existence independently .
Now there is just an agreement of interchange of news between both the agencies .
While P.T.I receives international news from Reuters , P.T.I provides Indian news to Reuters .
Today , P.t.I is the biggest news agency of Asia which prints news in English .
P.T.I is India ` s ultra modern and developed news agency .
It has its own feature service , video data service etc .
This agency is concerned with Asian news network and aligned mass .
Since April , 18th , 1986 the Hindi news service `` Language `` of P.T.I has begun .
The agency started `` scan news service `` from this month where fresh news is continuously being shown on doordarshan screen through display unit in a written form .
The first Press commission had suggested that there should at least have two news agencies in the country which should compete with each other and should complement each other .
U.N.I was formed by those newspapers who agreed to this opinion of the commission .
U.O.I was shut due to financial crisis in 1958 .
Thus U.N.I began its work from 21st March , 1961 on the disintegrated machines of U . P . I .
U.N.I. was registered on November 10th , 1959 .
U.N.I is also an English news agency .
The second Press commission has expected from the English news agencies that it should initiate the formation modern and high level news agencies of Indian languages .
On the basis of this on May 1st , 1982 U.N.I started giving services with the name `` Univarta `` .
U.N.I. is written in short as `` YunYu `` and Univarta as `` Yuva `` .
