J . Krishnamurti is seen as the great spiritual thinker of India .
As a spiritual leader he has also influenced the intellectuals of the country .
He was born May , 11th 1895 in a small town Madnapalli in Andhra Pradesh in a virtuous family .
His full name is Jiddu or Jiddu Krishnamurti .
Krishnamurti is a spiritual author .
Mrs. Besant and the members of theosophical society saw that essential characteristic in J . Krishnamurti which are there in a godfather .
J. Krishnamurti was adopted in an adolescent age by Mrs . Besant and was brought up in an environment highly imbued in religion and spirituality .
J. Krishnamurti completed his studies in England but the workplace of his life was India .
J. Krishnamurti never established himself as a spiritual guru .
He was basically as spiritual thinker and his followers see him as a path demonstrator .
Whatever he said was the conveyance of his insight .
He told about the true nature of meditation and significance of religiosity .
He talked about that radical change in the life of every individual of the world with which one can move towards the actual progress of humanity .
J. Krishnamurti always emphasized that the individuality and social conscience of human are not two different things , he explained that , `` the whole world is a village `` .
He told that actually the whole humanity , the entire world is reflected inside us .
He talked about the deep relations of human with nature and environment and the integrity of nature and environment .
Denying every kind of spirituality and psychological claims and cautioning that nobody should make them any guru or authority were his warning sentences .
J. Krishnamurti himself established foundations in America , India , England , Canada and Spain in order to save himself and his education from glorifying and to save his education from being mutilated by doing explanations .
He also established schools in India , England and America about which he believed that not only classical intellectual skills but understanding brain should also be emphasized .
Apart from spending lives and technical skills , the art and skill of living should also be taught .
With this he meant to take education towards casual discussions , dialogues and consultation through the medium of spirituality .
J. Krishnamurti passed away on February 17th , 1986 .
His original literature is in English language , which is translated into many major prevalent languages .
Audio and video tapes of talks , question & answers , interviews , mutual conversation and discourse are also available .
According to some thinkers religion and philosophy ends with the thought of J . Krishnamurt .
Walking on realistic and clear path is needed in order to make the world better .
Nothing should be inside you when you are ready for a clear and explicit sky .
Life is not a part of earth , you are yourself sky .
J. Krishnamurti says that if you are anything yet you are nothing .
There is ease and intellectuality in the ideology of J . Krishnamurt .
His education which is the sapling of his deep meditation , true knowledge and best behavior influenced all the philosophers , preachers of religion and psychiatrists .
He said that you can only be a human in true sense by freeing yourself from what you have known from the tradition , country and time .
The ideas of J . Krishnamurti as a world thinker were revolutionary .
The ideology of Krishnamurti is considered similar to the invention of Atom bomb .
Krishnamurti was the eighth child of his parents .
Therefore he was named Krishnamurti .
Krishna was also the eighth child of Vasudeva .
Krishnamurti was born in a middle class Brahmin family in Madnapali of Andhra Pradesh in 1895 .
His parents were theosophist .
They handed over Krishnamurti and his younger brother Nitiya to Dr . Annie Besant the chairperson of theosophical society .
W. Lead beater who was the supporter of Annie Besant and a long sighted person identified Krishnamurti while he was only a child .
Then Krishnamurti was of 13 years .
Everyone started thinking that Krishnamurti is the only boy and Annie Besant has chosen him as the ` Messiah ` .
She even established ` order of the star ` for him .
Truth is itself inside you .
In order to search truth man should be free from all bonds .
He spent his entire life as a teacher and a student .
The beginning of liberation begins itself by humans being humans .
But the human today is either Hindu , Buddhist , Christian , Muslim , American , Arab or Chinese .
The books written by Krishnamurti in English has been translated in all the major languages of the world .
Which is studiously read .
Sumitranandan Pant is counted among the great poets of modern Hindi literature .
He is the poet of nature , reality , spiritual consciousness .
He was honored with the highest Gyanpeeth award of the country for his poetic masterpiece named ` Chidambara ` .
Sumitranandan Pant -LRB- May 20th , 1900 - September 28th , 1977 -RRB- is amongst the four major pillars of Romantic period in Hindi literature .
Half of the 20th century was the creative period of Romanticist poets .
Sumitranandan Pant emerged as the originator of the new era in Hindi literature .
The nature description of Sumitranandan Pant was the best amongst them .
He was born in Almora , the extremely attractive valley of covered mountains whose natural beauty had assimilated in his soul .
Falls , snow , flowers , creepers , humming of bees , morning sun rays , cold breeze , an evening stepping down from the sky wearing the cloth of stars-all these things very easily became the ingredients of poetry .
Using ingredients of nature as symbol and their use as a reflection was the specialty of of his poetry .
He was born on May 20th in the Kausani village of Almora district of Uttarakhand .
His mother passed away after six hours of his birth . His grandmother brought him up .
The newborn was named Gusai Dutt .
He was the youngest of seven siblings .
The primary education of Gusai Dutt was done in Almora .
He did not like his name therefore he renamed him as Sumitranandan Pant .
He took admission in intermediate in Myor college here .
On the call of Mahatma Gandhi during non co-operation movement in 1921 he left college and started studying Hindi , Sanskrit , Bangla and English at home itself .
He served the Hindi literature historically by staying in a government bungalow decorated with natural beauty .
Sumitranandan Pant started writing Poems from childhood itself .
During 1926-27 his first collection of poems was published with the name `` Pallav `` .
After some time he came to Almora with his brother .
During the same time he was influenced with the ideology of Marx and Froyd .
In 1938 he came up with a progressive monthly magazine named `` Rupabh `` .
He was associated with the progressive writers union by being with Shamsher , Raghupati Sahai etc . .
He worked as the main producer in Akashvani from 1955-1962 .
There are many dimensions of the poetry world of Sumitranandan Pant .
His ideology was also influenced by saint Arvind which is visible in his later creations .
Thus the spiritual , social and political aspect of his poems is strong .
The period 1907-1918 is considered to be the first phase of the poet ` s life by the poet himself .
The poems of this period are collected in `` Veena `` .
`` Uchhavas `` was published in 1922 and `` Pallav `` in 1928 .
28 books were published during his lifetime which include poems , verse-theater and essays .
Shri Sumitranandan Pant comes up as a thinker , philosopher and humanitarian in his detailed literature but his most creative poems are collected in `` Pallav `` which is a collection of 32 poems and were written during 1918-1925 .
His entire literature has kept changing despite being influenced by the ideals of `` Satyam Shivam sundaram `` .
His later poems were imbued by Arvinda philosophy and human welfare .
Pant never bent down before traditional critics and progressive & experimentalist critics .
He did not deny the values before his poems .
He dismissed the allegations put on him through the medium of his poem `` Namra Awagya `` .
He used to say that one should sing the message of eternity and the introduction of humans is humanity .
For this incessant service of Hindi literature he was ornamented with highest honors like Padma Bhushan -LRB- 1961 -RRB- , Gyanpeeth -LRB- 1968 -RRB- and Sahitya Academy and Soviet land Nehru .
there is a whole era of modern Hindi poetry in his more than half century long period of creation .
There is a museum named `` Sumitranandan Pant literary gallery `` at his home where he spent his childhood which is near Almora located in the hills of Kumayu in Uttarakhand .
The certificate of the Gyanpeeth award received by him and the Sahitya Vachaspati award given by the Hindi literature institution are also there in the museum .
Further the manuscripts of the collection of his poems like Lokayatan , aastha , Rupam etc . are also kept safely .
The xerox copies of his correspondence with Kunwar Singh of Kalaankakar and Hariwanshrai Bachchan are also kept here .
In his memory every year Pant lecture series is organized in the museum .
A book named `` sumitranandan Pant Vyaktitva aur Kritatva `` has also been published from here .
Subhdra Kumari Chauhan is known as the great talented poetess of Hindi languages .
She has instinctively expressed her feelings related to country , society , life and nation .
She had started composing poems since childhood .
Her creations are filled with sentiments of nationalism .
Apart from love for the country and sense of nation the comfortable context of life are at the center of her poems .
Subhadra Kumari was a lady of elite family background .
she has been an alert poetess of national conscience but she has also expressed her experiences in stories after facing torture in prison many times .
Her family life was happy and prosperous .
She had four sisters and two brothers .
Her father Thakur Ramnath Singh loved education and her primary education was carried under his supervision .
She came to Jabalpur after getting married to Thakur Lakshaman Singh of Khandwa in 1919 .
She was the first woman to participate in the non co-operation movement started by Gandhi jee in 1921 .
The biography of Subhadra Kumari chauhan is written by her daughter , Sudha Chauhan in the book `` Mila tej se tej `` .
It has been published by Hans Publication , Allahabad .
Apart from being a creative person she was also a freedom warrior .
The book by Dr . Mangala Anuja throws light on the literary and freedom struggle of the life of Smt . Subhadra Kumari Chauhan .
It also marks her leadership in the freedom struggle through poetry .
She suddenly died in a car accident on February 15th , 1948 .
Apart from being a competent poetess Subhadra Kumari Chauhan was also a successful story writer and her first volume of stories is `` Rochak rachnaae bikhere moti `` .
Her second story volume was published with the title `` Unmadini `` in 1934 .
The main voice of all these stories is the familial and social panorama .
The third and the last volume of stories of Subhadra Kumari chauhan is `` seedhe Saade Chitra `` .
It has a total of 14 stories .
The stories Hingwala , Rahi , Tangewala and Gulabsingh are based on national issues .
subhadra Kumari Chauhan has written a total of 46 stories and she is famous as a very popular story writer in the Hindi literary world due to her extensive story vision .
The Indian postal department has issued a 25 paise postal ticket in the honor of Subhadra Kumari Chauhan on August 6th 1976 .
The great novelist and short story writer MulkRaj Anand was born on December 12th , 1905 in Peshawar .
He educated from Khalsa College of Amritsar .
He got a scholarship from London University from where he received PhD . degre .
Prolific writer Mulkraj Anand at first was comprehensibly recognized for his novels Untouchable -LRB- 1935 -RRB- and Coolie -LRB- 1936 -RRB- .
Here the analysis of poverty in Indian society was done .
He came back to Bombay -LRB- currently Mumbai -RRB- for national reform campaign .
Apart from self established art quarterly `` Marg `` Mulkraj anand edited many journals and he kept working on the seven section autobiographic novel ` the seven ages of man ` .
After the second world war Mulkraj anand came back to India .
He participated in Indian literature and art lover communities .
Further he played a significant role in establishing and encouraging English departments in the entire country .
The publication ` path ` of modern architectural research group was established by him .
He had also been the member of ` IPTA ` and All India progressive writers association .
At the age of 99 years in 2004 Mulkraj Anand passed away .
Acharya Hajari Prasad Dwivedi was a great novelist , epoch maker , critic , great writer and a great educationist of Hindi .
The original essayist , exquisite critic and the major novelist of cultural thought Achrya Hajari Prasad Dwivedi was born on August 19th , 1907 in `` Dubey ka Chapra `` named village in Ballia .
His family was famous for astrology .
His father Anmol Dwivedi was a great scholar of Sanskrit .
After being educated Dwivedi jee went to Shanti Niketan and worked there for many years in the Hindi department .
Due to the influence of Ravindranath Thakur and Acharya Kshitimohan Sen in Shanti Niketan he began the intense reading of literature and its composition .
The personality of Dwivedi jee was extremely influential and his behavior was very simple and generous .
He was the scholar of Hindi , English , Sanskrit and Bangla languages .
He had good knowledge of Bhakti period literature .
Lucknow University honored him by giving him the degree of D . litt .
Dwivedi jee was given the Gyanpeeth award for the highest honor of the country .
It is the highest literary honor of India .
The novel `` Banbhatt ki atmakatha `` is the large novel written by Dwivedi jee in Hindi .
Where the life of Banbhatt , the ancient Sanskrit poet is furled in the story of novel .
`` Ashok ke phool `` is the fine collection of his essays .
He has also written the history of Hindi literature and marked the major nature of Hindi literature in ancient and middle period .
His critical book concentrating on the saint poet Kabir of middle period is significant .
The credit of honoring the genre of Hindi essay goes to Hajari Prasad Dwivedi .
the subjects of his essays are criticism of Indian culture , astrology and varieties of literary religion and communities .
Further Dwivedi jee has also written fine essays and the credit of honoring genre of fine essays in Hindi goes to him .
The language of Dwivedi jee is pure literary Hindi .
He has used the language according to the feel and subject .
There are two aspects of his language - -LRB- 1 -RRB- simple literary language , -LRB- 2 -RRB- Sanskritised difficult language .
The first aspect is found in the general essays of Dwivedi jee .
Such types of languages also include the words of Urdu and English .
It is natural and smooth everywhere .
The other aspect of the language of Dwivedi jee is found in his critical creations .
It primarily has Sanskrit words .
This language is more restrained and pure .
There is no exhibition of artificiality and miracle in this language and that is natural and outpouring .
Disquisition style .
The ideological and critical essays of Dwivedi jee were written in this style .
It is the representative style of Dwivedi jee .
The language of this style is Sanskrit dominant and more pure .
Descriptive style .
The descriptive style of Dwivedi jee is extremely natural and interesting .
This style has dominance of Hindi words also the prevalent tatsama Sankrit words and prevalent Urdu words have been used .
The sentences are relatively big .
There is a successful and beautiful use of sarcastic style in the essays of Dwivedi jee .
This style has prevalent words of Urdu , Persian etc . language .
While Dwivedi jee has explained his subject elaborately , he has adopted the diametric style .
The creation of Dwivedi jee are of two types .
Prabandh Chintamani , Puratan prabandh sangrah , Vishwa Parichay , Laal Kaner etc . are Dwivedi jee ` s translated creations .
Apart from them Dwivedi jee has also created many free essays that have been published in various journals .
Acharya Hajari Prasad Dwivedi has a unrivalled place in Hindi essays and critical writing .
He is a classical essayist and successful critic .
His literary essays are priceless treasure of Hindi .
All his creations contain the imprints of his intense ideologies and radical thinking .
Hajari Prasad Dwivedi was honored with Padma Bhushan in 1957 in the field of literature and education .
The acclaimed author of Madhushala , Harivansh Rai Bachchan -LRB- November 27th , 1907-January 18th , 2003 -RRB- was a glorious poet and writer of Hindi .
Harivansh Rai Bachchan was born in a Kayastha family of Allahabad .
He was called Bachchan since childhood whose literal meaning is child .
Later he became popular by this name .
At first he received Urdu education in Kayastha schools which was considered to be the first step for getting law degree .
After which he did M.A from Prayag University in English and then moved to England for higher studies from where he did PhD on the poetry of W . B. Yeats .
In 1926 at the age of 19 years he was married to Shyama Bachchan who was then 14years old .
Unfortunately Shyama died due to T.B in 1936 .
After five years in 1941 Bachchan married a Punjabi woman , Teji Suri who was associated with theater and singing .
From her he got two sons Amitabh and Ajitabh .
Amitabh Bachchan is the leading actor of Indian silver screen .
Teji Bachchan has also acted in multiple plays of Shakespeare translated by Harivansh Rai Bachchan .
Harivansh rai Bachchan taught in Allahabad University .
Bachchan jee leads the most popular poets of Hindi .
He died on January 18th , 2003 in Mumbai .
His creation `` Do chattane `` was honored by the Sahitya Academy award of Hindi poems in 1968 .
This year he was honored with Soviet land Nehru award and Lotus award of Afro Asian summit .
Birla foundation honored him with Saraswati award for his autobiography .
Harivansh Rai Bachchan was honored with Padma Bhushan by the Indian government in 1976 for his special contribution in Indian literature .
Aatmakatha and Anudit kritiya are amongst the major creations composed by him .
Bachchan has been famous as a popular poet and poetry creation had been significant in his literary devotion .
He is called the singer of life ` s poet .
And apart from fun the philosophical interpretation of his life is embedded in his poetry .
The autobiography of Harivansh Rai Bachchan is a peculiar kind of book in Hindi .
Here apart from his life there are also discussions contemporary scenario , which is interesting .
Following the the four sections of his autobiography - Kya bhulu kya yaad karu -LRB- 1969 -RRB- , Need ka nirmaan fir -LRB- 1970 -RRB- , Basere se door -LRB- 1977 -RRB- , Dashdwar se sopaan tak -LRB- 1965 -RRB- .
The entire literature of Harivanshrai Bachchan has also been published in the form of collection .
In Hindi , Ramdhari singh Dinkar is the poet of national expression and the creator of cultural conscience .
He occupies the most precious position amongst the modern Indian poets .
The poetic conscience of Dinkar is the communicator of colonial slavery , social disparity and people ` s awareness .
Ramdhari singh dinkar was a major poet and thinker of Hindi .
National poet Dinkar is established as the best heroic poet of contemporary age .
He did intense reading of Sanskrit , Bangla , English and Urdu in the form of literature .
Randhari Singh Dinkar is the poet honored with Gyanpeeth award , the most prestigious literary award of the Country .
During the subordination period of the country Dinkar established as a revolutionary poet and came to be known as the national poet after the independence of the country .
He was the first generation of Romanticist poetry .
While at one side there is vigor , rebellion , anger and revolution in his poems at the other side there is expression of soft and painted feelings .
The excellence of these two behavior is found in Kurukshetra and Urvashi .
He was born on September 23rd , 1908 in simariya , Munger -LRB- Bihar -RRB- .
From 1934-1947 he worked at the position of sub-registrar in Bihar government and as a deputy director in advertisement department .
He was also ornamented with the degree of Padma Bhushan .
He was given Sahitya Academy award for `` Sanskriti ke chaar Adhyay `` and Indian Gyanpeeth award for `` Urvashi `` .
He died on April 24th , 1974 .
He will always remain immortal for his writings .
Apart from `` Urvashi `` , Dinkar jee ` s majority of creations are imbued with heroism .
After Bhushan he is considered as the best poet of heroism .
According to Hajari Prasad Dwivedi jee , Dinkar jee was the most popular of all the poets amongst the non Hindi speakers and an ideal for those who loved their mother tongues .
Harivansh Rai Bachchan had once said about Dinkar Jee that he should not be given one but four Gyanpeeth awards .
He said that he should be given separate Gyanpeeth awards for serving prose , verse , language and Hindi language .
According to Ramvriksh Benipuri , Dinkar jee gave a revolutionary voice to the country .
The famous creative writer Kashinath Singh has said that Dinkar jee was a nationalist and anti imperialistic poet .
He composed poems against the social and economical disparity and exploitation .
Urvashi swarg parityaka is the story of a fairy .
while ` Kurukshetra ` is the poetry form of Mahabharata ` s peace festival .
It was written after the second world war .
While the creation of `` Samdheni `` has been according to the social contemplation of the poet .
In ` sanskrit ke chaar adhyay ` , Dinkar jee has said that despite cultural , linguistic and regional diversities we think alike .
Dinkar jee was honored by the government and many institutions for literary creation .
Dinkar jee was honored by the Kashi city propagation committee , Uttar Pradesh and Indian government for his creation ` Kurukshetra ` .
The first President of the country Dr . Rajendra Prasad honored him with Padma Vibhushan in 1959 .
He was awarded with Gyanpeeth award in 1972 for his Poetry `` Urvashi `` .
In 1952 he was chosen for Rajya Sabha and for three consecutive years he remained its member .
Dinkar jee had intimate relations with Nehru jee .
In 1999 Indian government issued a postal ticket in his memory .
On the occasion of his birth anniversary , Nitish Kumar , the chief minister of Bihar unveiled his magnificent statue and offered garlands .
Sachchidanand Hiranand Vatsyayan ` Agyeya ` is known as an able poet , stylist , a story writer who gave a significant turn to fiction , fine essayist and an editor .
He was born on March 7th , 1911 in Kushinagar , a historical place in Devaria district of Uttar Prade .
Agyeya is the poet who established experimentalism and new poetry in the literary world .
Many Japanese Haiku poems were translated by Agyeya .
Apart from being a loner poet of multidimensional personality , Agyeya is also a good photographer and a tourists who searched for the truth .
He received primary education through Sanskrit oral tradition .
His studies began at home itself by reading Sanskrit , Persian , English , and Bangla language and literature in the supervision of his father .
He cleared the entrance exam in Punjab in 1925 and then took admission in the Queens college of Madras .
After completing his intermediate education in Science in 1927 , he took admission in the Forman college of Lahore for doing BSc .
After completing BSc . in 1929 , he chose English subject for doing his M.A but could not complete his education due to involvement in revolutionary activities .
Agyeya jee stepped into the field of journalism in 1936 .
From 1937-39 he edited ` Vishal Bharti ` published from Calcutta .
After which he moved into `` Bijli `` published from Patna .
From 1946 to 1952 he worked for the journal ` Prateek `` publishing from Allahabad .
From 1958-1959 he edited the English journal `` Vaak `` publishing from Delhi .
From 1940-42 and again from 1950-55 he remained in the news department of All India Radio .
In 1964 the famous weekly ` Dinmaan ` was set up by Agyeya jee and he edited it till 1970 .
He gave such a look to Dinmaan which was very different from any of the weekly published in Hindi .
After which he became the editor of ` Naya Prateek ` and remained in position till 1977 .
After 1977 he remained the editor of ` Navbharat Times ` -LRB- Delhi -RRB- .
From 1971 to 1972 Ageyeya jee also worked as the chairperson of the comparative literature and languages department of Jodhpur University .
Apart from various poetry creations Agyeya jee has also written many novels , stories , plays and essays .
The contribution of the versatile prodigy , Ageyaya jee , for the Hindi journalism is unforgettable .
He died on April 4th , 1987 .
All his poetry has been compiled in Sadaneera -LRB- two volumes -RRB- and all the essays written on other subjects has been compiled in Sarjana and Sandarbh and canons named Kendra and Paridhi .
Apart from editing various journals , Agyeya jee also edited land marking poetry collections such as Taarsaptak , Dusra Saptak and Teesra Saptak and also poetry collections like Rupambara .
In 1964 he got the Sahitya academy award for the poetry collection `` Angan ke paar `` and in 1979 he got the Gyanpeeth award for the poetry collection `` Kitni naavo me kitni baar `` .
Sahir Ludhiyanvi was a famous poet and lyricist .
He was born in Ludhiyana .
He has a major contribution in giving a new form and frown to the modern Urdu Poet .
The real name of Sahir Ludhiyanvi is Abdul Hayi Sahir .
He was born in a feudal family of Ludhiana on March 8th , 1921 .
Sahir educated from the Khalsa High School of Ludhiana .
In 1939 when he was a student of government college he fell in love with Amrita Pritam which was unsuccessful .
During college days he became popular for his poetry and Amrita was his admirer .
He did different kinds of work for running his livelihood .
Sahir Ludhiyanvi became popular as a poet in Lahore .
Where he came in 1943 and got published his first poetry volume `` Talkhiyan `` .
He started becoming popular right after the publication of `` Talkhiyan `` .
In 1945 he became the editor of popular Urdu journal Adab-e-Latif and Shahkar -LRB- Lahore -RRB- .
His views were communist .
After staying in Delhi for few days he came to Bombay -LRB- currently Mumbai -RRB- where he became the editor of Urdu journal ` Shahrah ` and ` Preetlari ` .
Later he tilted towards films .
For the first time he wrote lyrics for the film `` Aazadi ki raah par `` -LRB- 1949 -RRB- but became popular for writing the lyrics of the film `` Naujawan `` whose musician was Sachindev Barman .
Later Sahir Ludhiyanvi composed songs for popular films like Baaji , Pyasa , fir subah hogi , Kabhi-Kabhi .
Sahir Ludhiyanvi was a liberal and a sweet tempered person .
He was an atheist and after independence he missed many of his Hindu and Sikh friends who were in Lahore .
The acrimony of his life is visible in his poems .
The depth of his feelings , expansion of vision and sea of feelings are poured in his poetry .
His personality is also reflected from the songs written for Hindi -LRB- Bollywood -RRB- films .
Seriousness is reflected in such a way in his poems as if they are associated with his life .
The way his songs are generally put in a leveled and clean popular kind of films add laurels to their beauty .
The popular author of Bangla , Mahashweta Devi was born on January 14th , 1926 in Dhaka , the capital of Bangladesh .
Mahashweta Devi is the popular author of contemporary Indian literature .
Apart from the deprived sections of the society like dalits and tribes she has primarily presented the life of women .
He was honored with Gyanpeeth award in 1996 .
A lot many images appear in front of the eyes while recalling Mahashweta Devi ` s name .
Actually she has improvised her personality because of her hard work and honesty .
She established herself as a journalist , author , creative writer and revolutionary .
After independence in order to save themselves from the anti Hindu riots her family came to Calcutta from Dhaka , their home based in the Pakistan ` s part .
she started her life as a teacher and journalist after getting M.A degree in literature from Kolkata University .
Later she also did a job as a English lecturer in Kolkata University .
Later , for full time writing , she took leave from the job at University and dedicated her life to writing .
Mahashweta Devi started writing at a very less age and her short stories were published in many literary journals .
The first composition of Mahashweta Devi is `` Jhansi ki Rani `` .
Agnigarbh , Jangal ke Davedar , 1084 ki maa , Maheshwar , Gram bangla are some of her significant creations .
In her creations Mahashweta Devi has vividly portrayed the tribal belt of Bihar , Jharkhand and West Bengal and the life of tribes there .
That is an authentic description .
The boundaries of her writings is elaborate and the incongruity of present system is the origin of her fiction .
Dharmaveer Bharti was born on December 25th , 1926 .
He was a leading writer , poet , dramatist and journalist of modern Hindi literature .
He was also the editor of the then popular weekly journal `` Dharmayug `` .
He was honored with Padma Shree in 1972 .
His novel `` Gunaho ka Devta `` is considered to be an evergreen creation .
Suraj ka Satwa Ghoda is the inimitable experimentation of narrating stories , on which shyam Benegal made a film with the similar name .
Dharmaveer Bharti is a popular poet and dramatist .
`` Andhayug `` is also a poetry because it is a poetic drama .
It is his popular drama .
In 1948 Shree Ilachandra Joshi , the editor of `` Sangam `` was appointed as the associate editor .
He was appointed as a teacher in Hindustan Academy after working there for two years .
He worked for 1960 .
He assisted the editing of Hindi literature dictionary while teaching at Prayag University .
He came up with `` Nikash journal `` and also edited `` Aalochana `` .
Later he came to Bombay as the general editor of `` Dharmayug `` .
In 1999 in the direction of Udai Prakash a documentation has been prepared on Dr . Bharti by the Sahitya Academy , Delhi .
He was honored with many awards for his contribution to the literature , arts , journalism of the country .
Dr. Dharmveer Bharti awarded with Padmshree in the year 1972 has received many awards during his lifetime which include - Haldi Ghati best journalist award , best dramatist award -LRB- music theater Academy Delhi 1989 -RRB- , Bharat bharti award -LRB- Uttar Pradesh Hindi Sansthan -RRB- , Maharashtra Gaurav -LRB- Maharastha government 1994 -RRB- , Vyaas Samman ` s `` K `` Birla foundation .
Apart from being a great dramatist Dharmaveer Bharti is a popular novelist and major fiction writer .
Dharmaveer Bharti was a multifaceted genius creative writer .
He also wrote criticisms .
Kurtul N . Haider is a well known Urdu novelist .
She was born in Aligarh -LRB- Uttar Pradesh -RRB- in 1927 .
In 1947 she received post graduation degree in English literature from Lucknow University .
After receiving post graduation degree she got involved in teaching .
she had also been the management editor of BBC broadcast , Reporter-the daily telegraph -LRB- London -RRB- and Imprint journal .
For the contribution in the field of Urdu literature Kurtul-en-Haider has been awarded with many honorable prizes amongst which Sahitya Academy award , Soviet land Nehru award , Uttar Pradesh Academy award , andhra Pradesh and Bengal Urdu Academy award , Galib award etc are major .
Further she was also honored with Iqbal award and Padma Shree .
Many of her short stories and novels have been translated in English and other Indian languages .
Nirmala Verma is popular as author , novelist .
He is seen as the representative author of Hindi .
Her literature explores the rare creative consciousness of human life and looks for mould and words for its expression in the weft of human society and country .
Nirmal Verma -LRB- April 3rd , 1929-October 25th , 2005 -RRB- was an eminent novelist and journalist among the modern novelists of Hindi .
Nirmal Verma who was born in shimla has been honored with MurtiDevi award -LRB- 1995 -RRB- , Sahitya Academy award -LRB- 1985 -RRB- , Uttar Pradesh Hindi Sansthan award .
The stories of Nirmal Verma who became popular by Parindey -LRB- 1958 -RRB- are considered to be unparalleled from the point of view of expression and style .
Nirmal Verma leads the novelists in bringing modern perception into the Hindi stories .
He has written less but he has been successful in whatever he has written .
Nirmal Verma has been honored in the country and abroad as a writer .
A large part of Nirmal Verma ` s life is spent in Europe .
After doing M.A in history from St . Stephens college , Delhi , he taught for some days .
He got the chance to stay in Delhi from 1959-1972 and during the same time he traveled the entire Europe and knew about different cultures closely .
For seven years since 1959 he remained in the oriental institute of Prague -LRB- Czechoslovakia -RRB- .
Later he did the cultural reporting for Times of India by being in London .
He came back to his country in 1972 .
A film was made on his story `` Maya Darpan `` which got the award for the best Hindi film 1973 .
In 1988 his collection of stories `` The world elsewhere `` was published by Readers International , England .
During the same time a documentary film made on him by BBC was telecast .
After struggling with lungs disease he died at the age of 76 years on 26th October , 2005 in Delhi .
Apart from writing Fiction Nirmal Verma has also written ideological essays on Cultural literature and incidents of society .
Nirmal Verma got the highest honor of literature in India , the Gyanpeeth award in 1999 .
His last novel , `` Antim Aranya `` was published in 1990 .
`` Dhundh se Uthti Dhun `` and Cheedon par Chandani `` are his travel memoirs which have given a new dimension to the discipline of writing .
In 2002 Nirmal Verma was honored with Padm Bhushan in the field of literature and education by the Indian government .
Raghuveer Sahay is basically seen as a poet in Hindi literature .
For poetry writing he got the honorable Sahitya Academy award of the country .
As a poet the comprehensive impact of Raghuveer Sahay ` s poetry can be seen today extending on the generation after him .
In the origin of his poetry there is the affection towards the then country and its social conditions .
Sahay -LRB- 1929-1900 -RRB- in his creation touched those issues , subjects on which very less was written in the literary world .
In his poetry he also included the different issues other than the usual strange and lonely issues in literature .
He said that his poetry sometimes reminds of the off-white .
Like a lusterless person Sahay was a poet who criticized politics .
His poetry basically showed the frown of journalism and an experience newspaper .
His poems remind of Nagarjun from the perspective of language and style .
Raghuveer Sahay born on 9th December , 1929 in Lucknow was a short story writer , essay writer and critique apart from being a poet .
He was also a well known translator and journalist .
He was honored with Sahitya academy award in 1982 for his book `` Log Bhool Gaye hain `` .
His other books `` Atmahatya ke viruddh hanso hanso `` , `` Jaldi hanso `` and `` Seedhiyon par dhoop `` were quite popular .
In his poetry he presented the anxiety related to people but sometimes romanticism was also seen in his creations .
Thus swiping English he has written , By teaching English they have made Subjects and by studying English we are being Subjects .
Raghuveer Sahay ` s poems were included in Agyeya ` s book `` Dusra Saptak `` .
Three names were leading during that time .
Gajanan Madhav was known for the cognition of salvation , shamsher Bhadur was known for poetry while Sahay was popular for his language and style .
Sahay did his M.A in English literature .
He had been a special correspondent in all India Radio , Delhi , Navbharat times , Delhi and Kalpana , Hyderabad .
Sahay became the first news editor in `` Dinmaan `` .
Vidyadhar Surajprasad Naipaul has been honored with many literary awards .
He is also known as the master of verses in English .
Vidyadhar Surajprasad Naipaul was honored with Nobel Prize in 2001 .
Many novels were written by him .
Where `` A horse for Mr . Biswas `` is his greatest and most popular novels .
In 2008 Vidyadhar Suraj Prasad Naipaul was listed among the 50 great British creative writers by `` The Times `` .
Where he was at the seventh position .
Vidyadhar Suraj Prasad was born on 17th August , 1932 in Trinidad , Chaguanas .
He educated from Trinidad .
For a long time he remained a national of Britain .
His father , younger brother and cousins , all are counted among popular authors .
Hw was married to Nadira Naipaul .
His younger brother shiv Naipaul was also quite a good writer .
His most popular novel is `` A horse for Mr . Biswas `` .
Naipaul and Kapildev family had been quite influential in Trinidad .
Salman Rushdie is a British novelist and essayist of Indian origin .
He is not only a popular novelist and essayist of India but of many countries .
He was born on 1st June , 1947 in Mumbai .
Salman Rushdie ` s book `` Midnight Children `` was awarded with Booker Prize in 1981 .
His fame increased after getting this award but the novel `` Shaitani amantesh `` became controversial .
It was written by him in 1988 .
It will be a hyperbole if Vikram Seth ` s name doesn ` t appear in Indian literature .
He is a well known personality in Indian literature .
Apart from being a novelist Vikram Seth is also a poet .
Vikram Seth was born on 20th June , 1952 in Calcutta .
He was brought up in Calcutta .
Her mother Leela Seth has got the honor of being the first lady of the Supreme court of India .
The credit of bringing Bangla literature at the top goes to Ravindra Nath Tagore .
He has written many poetry collections the major ones are novels , essays , stories etc . .
Ravindra Nath Tagore also wrote many powerful political essays because of which some political changes took place .
Ravindra Nath Tagore was born in 1861 BC in an affluent family of Bengal .
His father Shri Devendra Nath was the supporter of great changes in Hindu society .
Ravindra Nath Tagore was fond of writing poetry .
His famous poetry collection `` Kavi-Kahini `` published during that time .
His poems were being published in `` Bharti `` when he was in England .
In 1881 he appeared before the people as a public speaker .
Not only poetry but there was a tremendous coordination of literature-culture , art and education in poet Rabindra ` s life .
After the Bengal dissolution in 1905 he started participating in a full fledged way in national movements .
His national songs had aroused consciousness in entire Bengal .
He lead large processions .
Very soon poet Rabindra became a forefront leader of national movement and a major exponent of nationalism .
Being disappointed with all these situations Rabindranath started residing in shanti Niketan .
Rabindra had definitely taken leave from active political revolution but kept spreading the feelings of renaissance by literary creations .
He expressed his disagreement towards the political ideology prevalent among his writers .
There was uproar everywhere in the literary world on the publication of the English translated version of his leading book `` Gitanjali `` .
He was also awarded Nobel prize for this book .
During his Europe visit in May ,1912 he gave speech at many places .
His main purpose was to present everything that is best in Indian culture before the people of Europe .
In October 1913 he came back to India again and on 15th November he got the good news that he has been honored with Nobel prize for ` Gitanjali ` .
Now the glory of Rabindra had reached everywhere .
On June ,1915 the government provided him with the title `` Sir `` .
Rabindra frequently visited foreign and raised India before World by doing non governmental cultural work as a messenger .
There was revolution against the Rowlatt act in 1918 and the government adopted extremely repressive policies .
Because of this Rabindra gave away the title `` sir `` awarded to him and wrote a letter to the governor that the atrocious repression cycle that is being run by the government is nowhere found in the history cultured administration .
On 22nd September , 1918 Guru Rabindra Nath Tagore established Vishwabharti and from July 1919 teaching began there .
Students from India and abroad came to this Institution .
They studied and did research only on Indian tradition and culture .
National song `` Jan gana mana `` was created by Rabindra nath Tagore .
In 1941 Rabindra Nath Tagore left us forever .
Coming from a tribal region Jhumpa Lahiri not only made India proud but also left an indelible imprint on America , she was made a member of the President ` s committee on arts and humanities by the President Barack Obama .
Jhumpa Lahiri ` s first short stories collection `` Inspector of melodies `` was awarded with Pulitzer award in 2000 .
Jhumpa Lahiri was born on 11th July , 1967 .
But she is a daughter of a Bengali tribal family .
Her real name is Neelajena Sudeshana .
when she was three years old her family moved to America .
The distinct element of Lahiri on his identity is an inspiration for Gogol , the protagonist of his novel `` The Namesake `` who has a uncommon name .
After completing her high school from south Kingston Lahiri did her graduation in English literature in 1989 from Bernard college .
Lahiri taught creative writing in Boston University and Rowed island school of design .
In 2001 Lahiri married Alberto Vourvoulias Bush who was a journalist .
Lahiri stays in Berkline , NewYork with her husband and two kinds whose names are octavio -LRB- 2002 -RRB- and Noor -LRB- 2005 -RRB- .
In the beginning for years Lahiri ` s short stories faced rejection from the publishers .
For the first time she could not know that her subject was an experience of the past days spent in India and America .
The thing that attracted me towards this art was the desire to bring the two worlds inside me onto page which I did not have the courage or the maturity to do in real life .
600,000 copies of `` Interpreter of melodies `` were sold and it received the Pulitzer of fiction for 2000 -LRB- It was only for the seventh time that a story collection had won this award -RRB- .
Her first novel concentrated more on her than on Ganguly family .
Which was published in 2003 with the name `` Namesake `` .
A film adaptation of `` the namesake `` was released in March , 2007 which was directed by Meera Nair and in it Karl pen had worked as Gogol and Tabu and Irfan Khan played the lead roles as parents .
There is an organization with the name Pay pan in America which promotes friendship and cooperation between the authors .
In February , 2010 with other five members , he was elected as the member of the humanities and art committee .
In a lucid way Lahiri has very well etched the the life of non resident Indians living in America .
It is the specialty of his writings .
These migrants have to maintain a co-ordination between their place of birth and the cultural values of their adopted homes .
The Lahiri has tried to investigate the struggle , anxieties and prejudices of the characters that she has taken in her writings so that the minute details of tribal psychology and behavior can be prepared .
In `` Unaccustomed earth `` she had concentrated on the struggle for raising the first generation of Indian Anglo-american and her family in a country different from her country .
Unaccustomed earth is away from the original nature because here the characters of Lahiri step into a new era .
These stories search the destiny of second and third generations .
Well known Jaishankar Prasad -LRB- 1889-1937 -RRB- occupies a special place in the Hindi literature as a poet , novelist , dramatist and story writer .
Her epic poetry `` Kamayani `` is an unparalleled creation in Hindi poetic literature .
His contribution in the field of Fiction is significant .
He was unmatchable among the among those who wrote sentimental stories .
He has five story collections , three novels and almost twelve poetry .
Jaishankar Prasad was born on 30th January , 1980 , Varanasi .
Primary education was received till class eighth but studied Sanskrit , English , Pali , Prakrit languages at home .
Later he wholeheartedly did the self study of Indian history , culture , philosophy , literature and Purana stories .
Jaishankar Prasad is considered to be one of the four pillar of romantic period .
As a great writer in Indian literature the popular writer Jaishankar Prasad has the credit of creating plays filled with national consciousness .
He has revealed many glorious aspects of human compassion and Indian wisdom through various creations .
In a short life of 48 years he wrote for various disciplines including poems , stories , drama , novel and critical essays .
He died on 14th January 1937 in Varanasi .
Prasad was a prestigious novelist and Hindi stories got a rich basis through his stories .
`` Chhaya `` , `` Pratidhwani `` , `` aakashdeep `` , `` Aandhi `` , `` Indrajaal `` are his famous stories .
The entire life of Jaishankar Prasad was spent in literary creations .
Apart from drama he has also written novels , the major ones are-Kankal , titli , Iravati etc .
There is a slight difference of fourteen years between Indian independence and Amartya Kumar Sen ` s birth .
He was born in 1933 in Shanti Niketan .
His father worked in shanti Niketan .
After completing his primary education Amartya Sen got graduation degree from Calcutta university in 1953 .
Later he went to England got MA and doctorate degree from Cambridge University .
After coming back to the country he was appointed as the head of the department of Economics department at the of just 23-24 years .
In 1963 he was appointed in Delhi school of Economics of Delhi University .
During that time economists like V . K . R . V . Rao and K . N . Raj were working with him .
Amartya Sen was associated with this organization till 1971 .
He also received many visiting posts and honorary degrees .
at present he is the chairperson of Trinity college , London .
In 1960 he got married to Navneeta Dev , the popular writer of Bangla but this relationship could only last till 1974 .
Dr. Amartya Kumar Sen set a new achievement by transforming the old ideologies concerned with economics .
He gave a new direction to the age old to the American and European ideologies regarding economics .
When she was awarded Nobel Prize for economics by `` The Royal Science Academy `` of Sweden the authenticity of his ideologies got a stamp .
He also proved that Indians do not lag behind other people of the world in any field .
Amartya Sen has stirred the welfare aspect of economics .
By mentioning the real reasons of poverty and and famine he has thrown light on many such things which were not thought by anybody till date .
This is the biggest specialty of his ideologies .
His analysis of Bengal ` s famine is based on his personal experiences .
Amartya Kumar Sen is the first economist who has associated economics with the welfare aspect of human .
Whoever intellectual person who is awarded with Nobel prize in economics has been believing that the main purpose of economics is to increase the heritage .
Whichever number of studies have been done so far , their objective was to use the available funds so that it increases all the more .
It is evident that the biggest cause of poverty is illiteracy .
Amartya Kumar Sen associates education to the profession and upliftment of humans .
According to Amartya Kumar Sen the social inequality is also the cause of poverty .
At many places he has said that in India women work hard all their life yet their lives are spent in lack of facilities and inequalities .
Food , health , education and even in terms of clothing women are not considered to be equal to men .
The situation is same in some other countries of Asia .
Regarding education he also says that even today the primary education in India is very backward .
He lays emphasis on the fact that primary education is very essential for the progress of any country .
Indian government has honored this famous economist with ` Bharat Ratna ` , the highest honor of the country .
Vajpayi is the first Prime minister to be appointed on this post after Jawaharlal Nehru .
Till the next elections in 1999 Vajpayi worked as the acting Prime minister .
An experienced parliamentarian whose tenure has is extended till five decades , Vajpayi was elected eight times for the lower house , Loksabha and two times for Rajya Sabha .
For Loksabha he was elected as a member of Bhartiya Jansangh -LRB- BJS -RRB- in 1957 .
He was kept as a captive along with thousands of opposition leaders in prison during declared emergency -LRB- 1975-77 -RRB- during the the Prime ministerial rule of Indira Gandhi .
He proved to be of help in the establishment of BJP in 1980 but the fanatics took over him due to his lenient behavior .
Vajpayi is among those Hindu leaders who condemned the demolition of historical Babri Mosque located in 1992 .
He took oath as the Prime minister in May 2006 but remained on this post for just 13 days for not being able to get the support of other parties .
After the parliamentary elections in 1998 BJP formed a government with other regional parties in his leadership .
During this time in May 1998 India was declared to be a Nuclear power after the second nuclear test in Pokharan .
Despite the global condemn and the economic restraints imposed by the western countries Vajpayi maintained his sharp attitude and declared .
Apart from being a politician , Vajpayi a multifaceted person is also a creative writer and an author of many books .
His speech delivered as a foreign minister has been collected as `` new dimension of foreign policies `` .
As a popular poet Vajpayi has published many books of poems including `` Meri ikyavan kavitaayen `` .
Vajpayi , the son of a teacher has educated from Gwalior and Kanpur .
Though in the beginning he got attracted to communism but when the communists supported the making of Pakistan during 1940s he dissociated from it .
A group of Indian youth out on Antarctica journey has hoisted tricolor at a ` white island ` covered with snow with a message of protecting earth from Climatic change .
These youngsters are a part of a global campaign IAE 2013 .
They also played with `` gentoo penguin `` and leopard seal `` .
Sonal Asgotra , a member of the group told that this place looks like fairy tales .
It has peace that gives solace to the heart and is away from the noise , pollution and human world .
Working as a technical analyst in Chandigarh is among those few Indian citizens who has got the opportunity to participate in this global campaign along with other participants of the world .
the campaign has been initiated by British polar explorer Robert Swan .
Another member of the Indian team , 23 years old Anurag Malu said that there are a total of 8 Indians in the team .
Sonal said that on the eighth day we had our official flag day , where we had to hoist the flag of our concerned countries in Antarctica .
Malu said , `` It was a great day for all of us because we hoisted our flags `` .
Sonal sais , `` With white , the symbol of peace we thought that we have lived our entire life `` .
In less than zero degree temperature we slept under the open sky .
The tent didn ` t even have cover .
We stared the galaxy with the snoring seals .
IAE 2013 is the part of 2041 foundation of Swan .
This campaign has been organized on the completion of the journey of ten years of its foundation begun first time in 2003 .
A bus stopped at the Bypass bus stand of the localifor few seconds at 12 in the night .
A girl stepped down from that .
she looked here and there .
There was a sheen in her face for sometime after looking at a three wheeler .
`` Will you go to Bahranpur ? .
`` Yes , the rent would be 100 rupees . .
`` Alright lets go .
Though the girl asked but the fear of going 3 km at the middle of the night with a stranger was visible in her eyes .
But the news of worrying ailment of father was more than the fear of the driver .
Three wheeler had started , then the girl saw the driver holding the envelope kept before him .
He looked at the three photographs kept in it and then kept back the envelope .
The girl did not want to ask about the photographs but still she asked .
These photographs are of my mother , daughter and sister .
After the Delhi incident I have started keeping them with me .
whenever a woman sits in my car I see them .
Before the any bad thought enters our mind this realization is enough that I also have a mother , sister and daughter at home .
Now the girl was assured and thought that it would be good if every man starts keeping these photographs in his purse .
An old man lived in a village .
He had crossed 80 years of age and had become emaciated .
His village was full of green farms .
Everyday he went to the ruined forest five miles away from his village which connected the village near his village and the people of both the villages used this path .
Majority of the trees of this forest had dried .
The old man everyday irrigated those plants by bringing water from a drain built in the forest .
On day when the water of the drain dried then he went to the farm of farmer located at some distance .
The farmer was sitting in a hut built in the farm .
He asked the old man - `` What do you need Baba ? .
The old man said - `` I need five pots of water .
I need to irrigate the dry trees and plants of the forest .
The water of the drain had dried , the plants will regrow if you ` ll me water for few days from your well .
The farmer surprisingly asked - `` Baba ! are you coming five miles away from the village to irrigate the plants ? .
The old man said - `` I had the only son who died due to some disease while he was young .
I am very poor .
I can not build hospice , pond and wells so I irrigate these plants with a hope that when they will become green then humans , animals , birds will rest beneath the trees and consequently they will get something to eat in the form of fruits .
I will do this till there is strength in my body .
Seeing that emaciated old man ` s welfare feelings the farmer bowed his head before him .
The farmer also started helping him in his work from that day .
The summary is that everybody live for themselves but the one who lives for others is a great person in true sense .
The censor board has decided to give adult certificate -LRB- A -RRB- to the item songs .
Now it is difficult to see Sheela , Munni , chikni chameli or Jalebi Bai in drawing rooms .
On the fresh direction of the ministry of information and broadcasting the Indian censor board has decided that an item song that contains vulgarity should be provided with a of adult certificate which work as a gimmick in making a film successful .
As a consequence the there will be a ban on the television telecast of such songs after getting the adult certificate .
The CEO of the Censor board , Pankaja Thakur has confirmed this news through Bhaskar .
She said , `` not only the lyrics of some item songs are objectionable but their filming is also vulgar .
Many times there is no direct link of these songs to the story of the film but the intention of putting such songs in the film is that the film can be promoted by telecasting them on television .
We are regularly getting complaints that little boys and girls are getting adversely affected by these songs .
According to the new direction we have decided that such songs will be given A certificate .
The producers of such films have to get a A certificate separately before telecasting them on television as a trailer or teaser .
Although the film industry people have opposed this step but the censor board is unswerving on its decision .
After every ten minutes there is a heap of complaints not only in the ministry but in the censor board concerning the little girls tapping their feet on the item songs such as `` chhuna na chhuna . mai hu teri fantasy `` or `` I am too sexy for you `` of `` tees mar khan `` in the drawing rooms of common families .
Recently the home ministry has asked all the ministries that what are measures are being taken to curb the crime against women and bringing sensitivity in people .
According to the sources apart from the other initiatives in this concern the the information and broadcasting ministry has also talked about the initiative that should be taken by the censor board to ban such item songs that present women as a product .
Yashraj films has been charged with a fine of 12.5 lac rupees for shooting without permission in Nahargadh sanctuary .
The cameras and vehicles of the unit were seized for violating the wildlife conservation act .
Who were released only after paying the penalty .
Monday late night film Ranjhana was being shot in Nahargadh sanctuary .
Monday afternoon a set was setup for its shooting .
Sound system and lighting were also fixed in the nearby areas .
Forest officers objected this .
On this the workers of the film unit fought with them .
After half an hour acting in the leadership of forest custodian , Naresh Sharma the cameras and the vehicles were seized .
The creative writers have been honored with the literary creation award 2013 for their excellent contribution to literature by the Indraprasth Sahitya Bharti .
On the occasion of the birth anniversary of Swami Vivekanand jee 11 creative writers were awarded in the program organized in Hindi Bhawan .
They were given certificates , memoir , coconut , shawl and garland .
On the occasion Sahitya Bharti , Swami Vivekanand , Jainendra Kumar and Gurudutt honor were given .
Krishnamitra was honored with Sahitya Bharti award .
Swami Vivekanand award was given to Sarojini Kulshreshtha , gurudutt award to Surekha Sharma , Janendra Kumar award to Purna Dabas respectively .
Suresh Chauhan was given `` Narendra Mohan journalisn award `` for the book `` Nirbheek avam swachchnd journalism `` .
Beer Sain Jain Saral was honored with Kamla Ratnam award for the book `` Akelepan ka dard `` .
While Prof . Lallan Prasad was honored with Bhawani Prasad Mishra award for the book `` Maati ki mahak `` .
On the occasion BJP spokesperson Minakshi Lekhi , the chairman of the organization Devendra Arya , the minister Manoj etc . were present .
A family in a traditional society which is otherwise disciplined but its members are unsatisfied .
The play Aadhey-adhurey based on the urban life showing the conditions of a middle class was staged on Thursday in Sriram center .
The play directed by chandrashekhar Sharma was quite appreciated by the viewers .
In sriram center on the last day of Youth theater festival the Adhey-adhurey play of Mohan Rakesh showed the problems of a middle class family .
In the play revolving around a middle aged lady who is unhappy with her marriage the emerging disagreements were quite clear .
The woman wants to keep her family together handling her naughty children .
While the other members of the family also live in dissatisfaction .
Sarcastic dialogues were used in the play which was quite appreciated by the viewers .
The comedy role of some members of the family titillated the viewers .
There was excitement among the viewers regarding the Tingmanshu Dhuliya directed film `` Sahib biwi Aur Ganster `` from before .
Those who had watched its first part had great hopes with this film that they will get something good to see .
After the inclusion of Irfan Khan and Soha ali khan in the film everybody expected that the film would be exciting but it did not happen .
The film proceeds with this fact that everything is fair in war but its end disappoints people .
The story of the film moves forward from the first part but not in the same manner .
Sahib who is Jimmy shergil is on wheelchairs and the style of Biwi who is Mahi Gill is similar .
Irfan Khan is in the role of gangster and the new character Ranjana who is soha Ali Khan has been associated with all the three from time to time .
There is a feeling of revenge in the film and also the cocktail of money , power and politics .
If we talk about work then the director , Tigmanshu Dhuliya has done the right work .
Possibly he will carry forward this story because it is open .
All the central characters have worked wonderfully , specially the more we compliment Jimmy would be less .
Irfan is in his style and the attitude of Mahi is also similar .
Soha has proved that now she will get job .
She has moved ahead of her limitations and opened .
Raj Babbar and Pravesh Rana has also acted well .
Mugdha Godse and anjana sukhani could not do that special in item number .
Songs and music are not that significant in films but seem to stop the films from moving forward .
Obviously the lyrics of the songs are different but they do not seem to coordinate with the story .
The song with Piyush Mishra ` s voice `` Bas Chhal kapat Prapanch hai . `` is the only song that associates with the story .
Despite consistent protest we are unable to control inflation , how can the common man survive in such a situat n ?
This question has been raised through film .
The story of the film revolves around Puttan Pal -LRB- Sanjay Mishra -RRB- who spends a middle class life with his father , wife and brother .
The household runs with difficulty with his earning and every time he looks for new ways of earning extra money .
One day after being frustrated he makes a plans to control inflation .
He gets bank loan in the name of his younger brother -LRB- Ranjan Chhabda -RRB- .
The film has been written keeping the process of getting loan and the misuse of government funds in mind .
The film is successful in narrating the situation in many scenes but it could not reach the level where the level of comedy could be turned into sarcasm .
There are a lot of shortcomings in the acting aspect of the film .
There is a repetition in Sanjay Mishra ` s acting .
In the role of grandfather Vishwamohan Badola keeps shouting without any reason .
Pragati Pandey and Ranjan Chhabda need acting practice .
Jakir Hussain makes the role of a loan inspector intense while his role could be done with light and general gestures .
The perspective of the director in this film is also a stopgap .
The series of events in the film story is also predictable and general .
Except the scene right before the interval there is no highpoint in the story .
There are a lot of gaps in the story at the technical level which could have been noticed bu the director and the editor .
The story of Haryana has been set up in Satara , Maharashtra but the hoardings of Satara written in Marathi have not been removed .
There are repetitions in dialogues and scenes at many places especially the dialogues written to grow love between the actor and actress seem to be a useless experiment like putting spices in green vegetables .
Actress Somya Seth has made a different identity with `` Navya `` the serial of star plus .
Few days back she was also seen in the star plus show `` The serial `` .
Now once again she is in rumors because of her lead role in the show `` Dil ki nazar se khoobsoorat `` being telecast on sony entertainment channel .
Somya says that I did not like the role of aradhya before .
When I went for the audition the script seemed to be incomplete and I came back without informing the casting director .
I thought I should not be doing thing work .
It happened in August , last year but again in December I got a call and I was told that my casting has been done .
Then I refused saying that I don ` t like your script .
Then when he told to change the script I agreed .
About her character Somya says that in real life I am not like Aradhya to a great extent but that role is near my heart .
Aradhya remains quite happy , she tries to make happy whoever she sees a little annoyed or in pain .
When she sees beautiful thing she keeps looking it for hours .
She takes a lot of time in combing her hair or putting lipstick that others feel jealous of her but she is determined .
When asked about the family and background she says , `` I am a native of Benaras `` .
I was born there .
I studied there till class sixth and I came to Mumbai with my parents for further studies .
Neither my parents nor I had a firm perspective regarding acting as a career for me .
Before coming into acting most of my time was spent in rejoice and sleeping .
I studied just for the sake of studying .
Just before the audition of Navya I was celebrating Birthday Party with friends .
I partied whole night and went for the audition in those clothes itself .
I was fortunate that I was chosen for the role of Navya .
I had not told anyone about this before .
When I went back home after signing the contract I told my family .
Papa kept asking me for three days whether I have signed any contr t ?
Now I enjoy acting .
The captivating actress of the past Zeenat aman will be very soon seen on the big screen .
Zeenat aman who was recently in limelight because of her marriage rumors with a man 30 years younger to him will be seen a 3D film .
The film will be directed by Ashish Bhavsaar , before this who has made films like `` Dad of night `` and `` mere Jini uncle `` .
According to Bhavsar , `` I feel that Zeenat can play the role of Maya very well .
Maya is beautiful and the chairperson of a beauty contest .
According to the sources the role was chosen keeping Zeenat in mind .
Zeenat has confirmed this news .
The film will be shot from 20th March in Chandigarh .
Finally the disagreements between film maker Rajkumar Santoshi and actor Sunny Deol have been resolved .
Very soon sunny will be seen in Santoshi ` s new film `` Fateh Singh `` in which he is playing the role of a Sardar .
The interesting thing is that sunny was signed for this film long back but later Sanjay dutt was taken in the film .
But now Sunny Deol has again returned in this project .
sunny and Santoshi together have given super hit films like Ghayal , Ghatak , Damini .
But both of them had separated their ways due to disaffection .
The chairman of Hindi Sansthan and chief minister Akhilesh kumar Yadav on Friday honored the creative writers with best literary award of state Bharat Bharati , Mahatma Gandhi literature and Hindi Gaurav Samman .
On Friday the well known creative writers gathered on a single stage to receive the nine awaited awards of 2009 , 2010 , and 2011 of Uttar Pradesh Hindi Sansthan .
In the Yashpal auditorium the chief minister said that it is the writing and the ideology of the creative writers that wipes out the disintegration of caste and religion .
since the beginning author and his writings had been showing direction to the society .
He also made an announcement to increase the honorary amount from next year .
The Bharat Bharti award for the year 2009 , 2010 and 2011 was given to Dr . Maheep Singh , Dr . Kailash Vajpayi and Govind Mishra respectively .
Although due to bad health Kailash Vajpayi could not receive the award himself .
The Mahatma Gandhi literature award for the year 2009 , 2010 and 2011 went to Dr . Kamal Kishore Goenka , Maitreyi Pushpa and Nasira sharma respectively .
while the Hindi pride award for the year 2009 , 2010 and 2011 was given to Dr . sarala shukla , K.P Saxena and Srikrishna Tiwari respectively .
For Bharat Bharti the honorary amount is two lac 15 thousand rupees and for Mahatma Gandhi literature honor two lac rupees each were awarded .
the honorary literary figures were given statue of mother Ganges , clothes and copper plates .
On the occasion of Lohia Jayanti the chief minister Akhilesh Yadav will honor the people achieving a certain level in the field of literature , sports , theater and arts .
They were awarded with prizes in a ceremony to be held in Lohia Park .
Till now five lac rupees were given by the state government but from this year onwards 11 lac rupees cash and a certificate will be provided .
Recently a lot many horror films have come that the viewers have now become bored of it .
In such a situation the director suparna Verma took a risk of putting the story of insecure mother who has the fear of losing her daughter so that it does scare the viewers nor give any message .
The film revolves around Bollywood actress Bipasa Basu .
she has taken divorce from her husband due to the regular torture .
Later he dies but his soul refuses to leave the world without taking his daughter with him .
A daughter who stays with Bipasha suddenly starts talking to her father Nawazuddin siddaqui .
Later Bipasha works to make her husband ` s soul unsuccessful in its motive .
Bipasha has done good work in the role of a mother who struggles to save her daughter but the viewers get irritated due to excessive cries and screams in few scenes .
Nawazuddin has not got more scenes in his share .
The best aspect of the film is technology .
Many scenes have the power of exciting the viewers .
Despite this the filmmaker remains unable to search a meaningful end of the film .
Actress Sonam Kapoor says that very soon she wants to dance on an Indian item number song in any film .
In her upcoming film ` Ranjhana ` Sonam has done a bit of traditional dance .
Sonam will be seen very soon with actor Dhanush and Abahai Deol in Anand Rai directed film ` Ranjhana ` .
The film will be released on 21st June .
Sonam said that I believe that traditional Indian dances are not shown in our films .
He said that Indian dances could be seen in very few films of Bollywood .
Last time they had seen Deepika Padukone in Om shanti om and Katrina Kaif dancing in Chikni chameli .
She said that she is a trained classical dancer .
Now also she is taking dance training .
some years back `` Mahi Ve `` , a song pictured on Malaika Arora had come .
Richa sharma had sung the song and artists doing pole dance with Malaika in the scenes .
Although there was no coordination between the lyrics of the song and the dance yet it came into limelight as it was filmed on pole dance .
Otherwise Pole dance is given by Western Europe .
For the past few years people ` s love for dance has increased quite a lot .
But getting expertise in this art is not a game of children .
The artists associated with Pole dance are being appreciated everywhere in the world .
People are welcoming them .
Such scenes are frequent in the West Hollywood night club of Los Angeles .
People hold their breath when Sargiya Anderson the popular dancer there reaches the heights of the pole and shows her tricks .
She revolves around the pole .
Then she hangs in an inverted position on the pole .
With full confidence she presents her talent .
Suddenly she leaves the pole .
People are amazed .
She saves herself totally few inches before falling on the floor .
The excited viewers once again take a deep breath and the entire stadium reverberate with the claps .
30 years old Sergiya who runs a vertitude polo fitness studio in woodland hills had started dancing from the age of four years .
But after long finally she got the chance to express her talent .
Recently in the national Arial pole art championship 21 more artists had participated with Sergia .
The maximum appreciations were gathered by 62 years old contestant Greta Pontareli .
Even at this age she had passion and energy like youngsters .
The pole dance which was once restricted to the strip club has now been included in the mainstream .
Pole dance is being defined in a new way in the dance , fitness , art and cultural scenario .
In the last five years the number of pole dance studios in America become three times .
Today there are 500 pole studios in entire America .
Another contestant Nadiya Shareef who was a n electrical engineer once says that in the contest there are not only strippers or gymnasts are participating but lawyers , doctors and people of every age and section from the professional world .
The presentation filled with energy , strength and vivacity is near her heart .
Bollywood star ajay Devgan has done a deal worth 400 million rupees with star India .
Under this deal star TV group will have the right to telecast all the new films of Ajay Devgan till 2017 .
Recently star group has done a similar deal with Salman Khan .
The deal done with Salman Khan is said to be worth 500 million .
Ajay Devgan and Salman Khan are the only two actors of Bollywood whose at least four films have done a business of more than 100 million in the domestic box office .
The basis of such deals is only this .
It is assumed that during the 5 years deal Ajay will make at least five films and will be in lead role in all of them .
Under such deals the satellite telecast of his every film will cost 40 million rupees .
After this deal the cost of Ajay Devgan to work in a film would be a minimum of 40 million and a maximum of 50-55 rupees .
Generally the producers of big films sell the right to telecast films and in return get 30-35 % of the cost incurred in films .
It is a matter to be thought upon that what will happen to them if the big stars will separate them from the big earnings .
The film telecasting right of most of the hit films -LRB- Singham , Gangajal , Golmaal -RRB- of Ajay Devgan are with star TV .
Under the new deal the right of telecasting upcoming films of Ajay Devgan such as Sajid Khan ` s Satyagrah , Singham-2 with Prabhudeva etc . will be there with star TV group which it will telecast on its various channels .
On Sunday , On behalf of Raganjali cultural and welfare society in the little theater group auditorium situated in Mandi House `` Saaz and Awaaz `` program was organized .
The program was inaugurated by formally lighting the candles .
The singers of the program Bijendra Chauhaan , Mukesh Gupta , Hari sharma , Anil Badhera , Vandana Bharadwaj , Nikita , Viki Slaria , Prakash gupta and Aishwarya Mishra mesmerized the listeners with their singing .
The program began with Narayan Vandana of classical singer Pandit Ajeet Kumar Mishra .
Mrs Himalaya hosted the program by presenting the filming of old songs sung by Mukesh , Mohammad Rafi , Lata Mangeshkar and other popular singers where his co-host Vinod Bajaj totally entertained the audience with jokes .
In the management of the program R . S . sharma and Vishal sharma of Sur aradhana events had an incomparable contribution .
Raganjali was set up by Pandit Ajeet Kumar Mishra in 2007 with an objective to provide stage to the new artists , coordinating the disciplines of music .
Delhiites are enjoying the sufi musical event program `` Jashn-e-khusro `` organized in the memory of poetry ` s father popular poet Amir Khusro .
In the ten day program , viewers are enjoying great presentations Sufi poets and classical music one after another .
The festival being organized by Aga Khan is running in Hazarat Nizamuddin area of Delhi .
On the occasion Ustaad Naseeruddin Sami of Delhi clan memerized the people with his presentations .
Further the folk tunes of Rehana and Perween Mirza , Saira Begam and Gulshan entertained the viewers .
while the influential presentations of Bhairavi , Jog , Darbari raag by learned Kankana Banerjee also won the heart of people .
Viewers lost themselves in an unseen joy by watching such a presentation of a musical drama imbibed in the Krishna devotion .
The staging of the play based on the life of great poet Soordas organized in the Ficci auditorium of the capital on Wednesday enraptured all the audiences . On the second day of the four day play named `` sun Bhai Sadho `` organized by the Hindi Academy people enjoyed Krishna devotion through the verses of Soordas and the philosophy of life .
The verses of the beautiful songs like Ankhiya Harisarshan ko pyasi filled the program with the feel of devotion .
Theater artist Shekhar Sen showed his talent by presenting the contemporary scenario in an influential way .
In the drama the life of Soordas from childhood to adolescence , youth and old age was presented before the viewers .
In a mesmerizing way People also saw the ordination of Soordas by great god Vallabhacharya , meeting with contemporary poetic majesties like Swami Haridas , Poet Tansen of emperor Akbar ` s court , Krishna ` s disciple Meera and Goswami Tulasidas and the incidents associated with them .
According to the program on Thursday a musical drama will be presented based on the life of Kabeerdas .
Everyone has pain .
Everyone falls ill .
No matter if it is a common or a special man .
In recent years like team India ` s sports persons , the superstars of Hindi film industry f elicited with the names like `` Mard `` , `` Dabang `` , `` King Khan `` and `` Greekgod `` and `` player `` are also suffering from wound and illness .
The fresh example is of actor Hrithik Roshan .
Recently during the shooting of film Bang Bang he got injured in his head .
Due to that he was caught with Sabdural Hematoma where blood releases in the veins of the brain .
Consequently he was admitted to hospital in a rush where a successful brain surgery was carried .
According to the doctors he can get back to work within four weeks .
Last year when Hrithik was shooting for `` Agnipath `` he got waist problem .
After treatment and few days after the leave from shooting the problem got solved .
During the interviews then Hrithik had declared his backache .
As a result he had to undergo shoulder surgery .
It was the eighth surgery of Shahrukh Khan due to injury who works 300 days in a year .
If we believe a website then the injuries of Shahrukh Khan include three fractured bones , badly bent ankle , broken thumb of right leg , injury in left shoulder , hairline fracture in backbone once and injured left knee .
`` Dabang `` Salman Khan is suffering from a peculiar disease trigeminal neuralgia .
Because of that he suffers pain in the veins of his face .
He underwent an operation in the year 2011 in America and became well .
Next year again during the shooting of `` Ek tha Tiger `` this problem began .
Doctors had also said that he shouldn ` t do stunts but according to Salman , who listens to the doctors .
I am more anxious about my fans .
How can I deprive my fans from how they want me to look on screen .
Salman should stick to his sayings .
In `` Dabang 2 `` he gave so many stunts full of sputter .
This year in January his younger brother Sohail Khan was supposed to begin ` Mental ` then suddenly he was ill and he had to leave for America for the checkup .
As a result the film could not be released on the Eid , the lucky slot of Salman .
Hopefully Shahrukh ` s Chennai Express will get this advantage .
Industry ` s `` Mard `` superstar Amitabh Bachchan also had to take a long break from Television and film work because of stomach ache .
Finally at the end of previous year in the beginning months of this year he was treated .
He became fit and then first shot for `` Kaun Banega Crorepati,Season-6 and then Prakash Jha ` s film `` Satyagrah `` .
Last year on 21st September during the shooting of Ramu ` s `` Department `` Big B had got hit his bones .
A week before that incident during the shootinh of Rohit Shetty ` s film `` bol Bachchan `` Abhishek Bachchan got injured in his head and returned back to Mumbai with four stitches .
While the rumors of Rajnikanth getting ill and then moving to foreign for treatment were also prevalent in media .
Because of which the shooting of his films `` Rana `` and `` Kochaidiyan `` was affected .
`` Khiladi `` Akshay Kumar is also there in the series of injured persons .
Recently while shooting for `` pistol `` , Akshay fell down from stairs and injured his ankle .
He says that its good that I did not fall from 6th floor from where I had begun the stunt .
While shooting for `` Jila Gaziabad `` Vivek Oberoi had fell and injured his back .
Later he was sent back to Mumbai .
Vivek also has long association with injuries .
He got badly wounded after felling from bike while shooting for Maniratnam ` s `` Yuva `` in Kolkata .
Yes , Amir Khan and Ajay Devgan are such actors amongst these superstars about whom we hear fewer cases of injures .
Undoubtedly it is clear that like nay common man the film stars get injured but very soon recover because firstly millions of money is invested on them and secondly with them they have prayers of millions of fans .
Anand Gandhi is now ready to be visible in films from the world of television and theater .
His film `` ship of theseus `` is in limelight much before its release .
This film has been awarded and appreciated in many domestic and foreign film festivals .
Anand is very happy with the praises the film has received so far .
Despite the fact that it isn ` t a pure spicy film , a big banner like UTV motion pictures is supporting it .
Anand says , `` My confidence has gone up `` .
Film is such a medium through which a film maker establishes dialogue with the society .
When you are told in the dialogue that the things that are there in the film has become a part of someone ` s life then its feels good .
Further Anand says , `` because of the co-operation of Kiran Rao and UTV pictures the scope of our film has increased .
Along with entertainment we would also give a potential message to the society .
There are three stories in the film moving along .
The first story is of a blind photographer .
The viewers will be able to see how he clicks pictures without eyes .
The second story is of a scholar saint .
He has fought against animal violence staying in city .
But the medicines that he has been given contains animal excerpt .
Now the big question before him is that either he takes up death or take up medicine and leave his ideologies .
The third story is of a share broker .
His life had been very restricted but his life gets a big dimension when a secret of kidney smuggling racket gets revealed before him .
He goes to Sweden in the search of stolen kidney .
There he gets the stolen kidney .
These are the three journeys of our film .
We have tied it with the thread of ideologies , dilemmas and experiences .
Anand believes that , very few films are there which try to question and answer the complexities of life .
While cinema is a great medium which compels an individual to distinguish between good and bad .
I always felt that this medium is not being used and experimented .
The point of philosophy is far-fetched .
The stories based on that are confined to Vikram Betal and Panchtantra .
Through this film I have tried to compel the viewers to search the ultimate truth while being entertained .
It was not easy to make a film like this .
There were a lot of challenges before the film .
According to Anand , `` the film took four years to complete `` .
And that too when the hero of our film Soham Shah himself decided to finance the film .
Once the film was ready and the big shots of the film industry saw it , the release of the film became easy .
Now the myth that nobody pays attention to small and offbeat films do not exist .
Priyanka Copra is busy these days for her role based on the life of Mary Kom , the olympic award winner .
For this she reached the city in Manipur where Mary Kom was born .
There Mary Kom and her husband gave an excellent reception to Priyanka .
Putting the photographs of this journey on twitter Priyanka has written that it was a very delightful feel the way Mary Kom and her husband Onler welcomed me in beautiful Manipur .
Champions are different .
I am learning from them .
It should be noted that Priyanka is playing the role of Mary Kom in her biopic film .
Priyanka also explored the beauty of Manipur with Mary Kom .
Priyanka writes , Manipur is actually beautiful .
I enjoyed a lot roaming there with Mary Kom .
No scope is being left in making successful the launch film of Girish Kumar the son of Kumar Taurani owner of Tips .
Prabhudeva ` s direction , the remake of south ` s hit film and Jacklin Fernandez ` s item song .
The promotion of the film has begun many months before and its release date had been shifted so that it does not clash with any big film .
Love is the basis of the film .
Shruti Hasan is opposite actor Girish Kumar .
Sonu sood is also the lead actor in the film .
The story of the film has been prepared keeping in mind the the activities of Dawood Ibrahim and the debate consistently taking place between India and Pakistan because of him .
The film is about a fictitious journey in which four intelligence officers go to Karanchi to bring back in India its most wanted people .
The director of the film Nikhil Aadvani is using is skill in the film .
Except `` Delhi Safarai `` so far he has mostly made romantic and multi starer films .
Although he had begun his career with Sudheer Mishra ` s film .
In the film Irfan , Arjun Rampal , Shruti Hasan and Huma Qureishi will be seen in the lead role .
After so many difficulties finally the film prepared last year is releasing now .
It is supported by Kiran Rao and Amir Khan and due to their initiative UTV is releasing in all across the country .
The story of the film is based on theory of paradox .
The story revolves around three people , all of them have different journeys but the philosophy of life is one .
It can prove to be a good film for those who see meaningful cinema .
The director of the film is anand Gandhi and Soham Shah , Adiya-al-kafis and Neeraj Kabi are in lead roles .
The film `` Bhag Milkha Bhag `` of Rakesh Omprakash Mehra is running well in single screen and multiplex of Mumbai .
Including Delhi this film is attracting viewers in many states of north India .
`` Bhag Milkha Bhag `` had collected around 8.5 millions on the very first day .
According to the current trend of successful films people were seen in large numbers on Saturday and Sunday .
Because of this on Saturday `` Bhag Milkha Bhag `` did a collection of 10.5 million and on Sunday it collected more than 12 million .
The weekend collection of the film was worth more than 32 million .
The honest attempt of Rakesh Omprakash Mehra has been fully appreciated by people .
On Monday the collection of the film was better than average .
At many incidents in the film `` Bhag Milkha Bhag `` one feels like crying .
Specially when Milkha could fight the challenges in his life with the help of his well wishers .
Whether it was the help by his sister , or by co-soldiers or by his coach .
In a scene Milkha runs in a 9 km . trial run with the soldiers recruited in the army .
The winner of the race was supposed to get more food and a particular quantity of milk .
Milkha used to run very fast , therefore he decide to run but sat in between the way .
He thought of quitting the race .
Then his co soldier came running from there and asks him to again run .
But Milkha refuses .
His companion runs and moves ahead screams saying milk in sometime .
Hearing his voice Milkha runs and tries to reach him and in doing so he wins the race .
Because of his friend ` s scream he runs and wins the race and he gets to drink the big glass of milk .
Milkha gives that glass to his friend but his friend refuses and gives it back to Milkha to drink it .
He says its the same thing whether I drink it or you .
One becomes sentimental after seeing this scene .
It inspired of having friendship .
There was another scene in the film where young Milkha was put into prison before getting recruited in Army .
His sister comes to release him from jail because of his ill-doings .
For this she had to sell her earrings .
Milkha gets to know this .
He promises his sister that he ` ll be a nice man .
After so many years Milkha comes to meet his sister .
He is wearing the blazer of Indian Athletics team .
The sister is fills with excitement after seeing him .
Then Milkha tells his sister that she should put her hands inside the pocket , as she puts her hand inside the pocket she finds those earrings whom she had once sold to save Milkha .
The film inspires to be a better friend and an individual which will bring happiness in life .
Majority of the girls like to wear the design , style , pattern , prints etc of Hollywood-Bollywood actresses .
The well known designer of the country , Manish Malhotra told how the top actresses walks on the red carpet with full confidence and becomes the center of attraction .
Kareena Kapoor : He had designed the outfit of Kareen Kapoor for the song Fevicol Se of Daban-2 .
Manish says that Kareena does not lack confidence .
She easily carries every kind of dress .
Whether it is a net saree or a cut-work dress .
Thus it is not difficult to prepare a new dress for Kareena .
Deepika Padukone : Every kind of dresses suit on the cylinder shaped body of actresses .
From waste to smile , face cut , height everything is perfect .
Few days back he had seen Deepika in Prabal Gurang ` s designer gown .
Even if she is given a saree to wear she will wear it that beautifully .
Shree Devi `` She as finical as pretty she is .
The way she has came back to the Hindi Cinema after break is worth praise .
She looks very pretty in Indian outfits .
Everyone praises her in Saree .
Priyanka Chpra : She has the thinnest waist amongst all the actresses of this period .
she is not afraid of experimenting with new style dresses , cut outs , jump suit , plazo pants , colored jeans .
She had adopted the retro look for Babli Badmash in Shootout at vadala 3 which suited her figure .
Kangna Ranawat : whether she gets ready in Shinel ` s dress or in corset of Dior , she enjoys whatever she wears .
Her hairstyle suits her charm .
She knows what looks best on her body .
She prefers to wear more of cute prints , jeans gown .
Katrina Kaif : Two years back I had given her to wear long kurti on skirt .
she became a talking point in film fare awards with this outfit .
Fans prefer to see her in Indian dress .
Skelop and mini dress suits her .
For the state the Maharashtra government has freed the tax from the film `` Bhag Milkha Bhag `` based on the life flying Sikh Milkha Singh .
Chief Minister Prithwiraj Chauhan said that according to the rights of the state government for the period of next six months `` Bhag Milkha Bhag `` has been made tax free .
On Wednesday the director of the film Rakesh Omprakash Mehra and actor Farhan Akhtar went to the Vidhan Bhawan and requested the state minister Balasaheb Thorat to free the film from tax .
During this time the opposition leader of the legislative assembly Vinod Tawde and BJP senior leader Shaina N . C . were also present with him .
On Saturday the Maharashtra government while declaring that the film `` Bhag Milkha Bhag `` is tax free said that National film development committee -LRB- NFDC -RRB- also has contribution in the making of this film .
Such films where only a single song is Adult -LRB- A -RRB- and the Censor board sees nothing objectionable in the rest of the film then the film will be given UA certificate .
The film has proved to be helpful in attracting the youngsters towards sports as it is based on Milkha singh , the international athlete award winner .
An officer of the Censor board said that recently the censor board gave an A certificate to Himmatwala -LRB- Ajay Devgan , Tamanna -RRB- , Sajid khan ` s film to be released on 29th March but rest of the film was worth U -LRB- public view -RRB- .
In such a situation the entire film was given UA certificate .
The shooting of film maker Pooja Bhatt ` s film `` Band `` was being done in collectorate on Friday .
Since it was a holiday the entire campus was given for shooting .
The collector Vikas S . Bhale had permitted .
Unaware of all these things the SP Hariprasad came to the collectorate at 2pm in the noon .
People stopped him when he was going to the office .
There was hassle , when it was too much the SP called the deputy and asked him to remove the shooting stuffs .
The shooting was stopped .
Pooja Bhatt said that only after seeking permission from the collector it was being shot .
If it is happening with Mahesh Bhatt ` s daughter what will happen to common people .
