Mom I am going to drop off Champa and Munna to school .
Twelve year old Pratap went out of the house carrying Muna ` s bag on the shoulder .
Following , Eight-year-old Champa holding the bag and five-year-old Munna jumping and running joined Pratap .
Two years back Pratap ` s father suddenly passed away .
Since then Pratap had decided that he will give his mother a hand at every work small or big .
Mother started working at the nearby spice center and Pratap had started going to father ` s friend Laxman uncle ` s shop .
Pratap occasionally missed his father a lot .
That time he used to keep playing with the collection of coins given by him for hours .
His father worked as a guide in the Red Fort .
He used to narrate interesting stories of medieval Indian civilization and history to Indian - foreign tourists .
He was very fond of collecting coins .
He had safely kept some small and big foreign coins and notes received with the fees in a box .
When he had time Pratap used to tell the stories heard from father to Champa and Munna - Father used to say that the coins speak , only somebody should be listening .
Champa really liked the coin with the imprint of snow bear .
When Pratap used to show Canada ` s two-color , two-dollar coin Champa ` s barrage of questions would get faster .
Brother does this bear skids on e ?
What is in the middle of the sn ?
Does it know how to sw ?
Does it catch and eat huma ?
Yes , Champa , such bears can swim in the water and catch fish to eat .
Pratap had no means to increase his father ` s collection , so he cut out pictures from old magazines and kept collecting them .
History , geography and mathematics were his favorite subjects .
Pratap asked Uncle If you say so can I ask brother Rakesh a question from the closeby TV shop .
Pratap had just reached Rakesh Modi ` s TV shop when a gleaming black car came and stood there .
Two men got out of the car .
The two men walked towards the TV store .
The fat man said that we have to buy TV .
Show the most expensive model .
We are fond of good stuff , do not give the old material .
The two men chose a big TV and asked to keep it in the car .
He kept a bundle of five hundred rupees notes in front of brother Rakesh .
While counting the money brother said to Pratap - Hey Pratap , just bring five hundred rupees change from your store .
Pratap caught a five hundred rupee note and ran and reached Laxman uncle .
Pratap ran back with a handful of notes .
But by that time the black car had left from there .
Brother Rakesh jovially said , hey Pratap something extraordinary happened today .
He went away giving total two hundred forty rupees more .
Pratap was engrossed in thought .
He asked `` Brother Rakesh , in how much hurry he was that he could not wait for two minutes ? .
He came to get the TV early morning , that too wearing torn slippers ! left the change too .
After arriving at uncle ` s shop Pratap said , Uncle , could you show me that five hundred note aga ?
When uncle showed the note , Pratap observed it carefully .
Uncle smiled seeing Pratap do so .
Hey son what are you doi ?
Do not play with the note , it would get torn .
Uncle , I am talking to it .
Wait a minute , this note is forged .
Uncle went to the TV shop and said , Rakesh , just listen to what Pratap is saying .
Pratap came forward , took out a paper cutting from his pocket and showed it to brother Rakesh .
Brother , look at it carefully , it says how can we recognize notes of five hundred .
But in this note there are only four lines and it ` s very sleek .
In it there is neither a black thread nor any mark .
Uncle was totally shocked and sweat appeared on brother Rakesh ` s forehead .
He pulled out a bundle of notes from inside and started observing the note carefully .
Two minutes later holding his head in both the hands he said , Pratap is right uncle .
What to do , I have lost thousands .
They have not even written their address in the warranty card .
But brother , I remember the number of the vehicle .
Call the police immediately .
Brother Rakesh immediately called the police and two hours later itself both those thugs were held at a police checkpoint in the city .
By the evening a crowd had gathered to meet Pratap at Laxman uncle ` s shop .
A journalist had also arrived .
Hey , where is that boy who talks to the not ?
The government has announced a reward for him .
Next day when Pratap ` s photo was featured in the newspaper , uncle arrived home to make him have the laddus .
He said to his mother , look , this what is call .
I used to laugh at his talk till yesterday and today he is becoming famous throughout the city as rupees virtually speak .
Dance is a smooth , natural and excellent medium to express the joy of the mind .
When the child is happy he automatically starts dancing shaking his hands and legs and he gets happy at that time when he gets the thing to satiate his hunger .
Similarly when the primitive man got the sport to satisfy his hunger after a lot of hunting , he would get ecstatic and would dance merrily , hence the expression of happiness gives birth to dance .
Note that only moving one ` s hands and legs and grooving is not the art of dancing .
It transforms into dance arts only by making it orderly and beautiful .
Hence there may be many useful arts , but five are considered as fine arts - architecture , sculpture , painting , poetry , and music .
The three components of music art are considered to be - singing , playing and dancing .
Playing is considered under singing , and dance under singing - playing .
The beauty of the dance increases when both singing - playing happens with the dance .
The dance which is not rule based is roughly called as folk dance .
Gradually many folk dances automatically came about , which have become an integral part of public life .
The main two types of dance are as follows , -LRB- 1 -RRB- Classical dance -LRB- 2 -RRB- folk dance .
Classical dance is rule based whereas folk dance is an entertainment based on folk life .
In the vast territory of India various kinds of folk dances and with them folk songs and folk music is prevalent .
Coming up is a brief summary of some .
Its an Indian belief that the origin of dance is from God Shiva .
He himself invented the various postures of dance and gave Sage Tandu dance lessons .
From Sage Tandu to Bharat and Bharat gave dance lessons to his sons .
The sons of Bharat promoted dance in this world .
This dance of Shiva was called as the Tandav dance .
A comprehensive account of this dance has been given in the book ` Natya Shastra ` written by Bharat .
Tandav dance is male dominant and Laasya dance is female dominant dance forms .
In India the impression of Tandav and Laasya is visible in all dance styles .
According to a puranic tale after killing the demon Tripurasur the Veer and Rodra Ras dominated dance that Lord Shiva performed that is called Tandav or Shiva Tandav .
In this dance the importance of preparation is a lot .
Limb position and the operating speed is very fast .
With the agility of limbs , Veer , Krodh and Raudra Ras - for a performance this is a very appropriate dance style .
At the time of the dance a blaze of anger bursts , the earth appears to be shivering and it seems as if the the destruction of the whole world is happening .
The five states of the world are shown in Tandav dance - creation , status , disappearance , appearance and destruction .
At the end the dance concludes with the joy of the victory over the demonic nature .
A vivid description of Tandav dance is given in ` Natya Shastra ` by Bharat .
In this dance the flexibility of the body parts , especially Kati -LRB- waist -RRB- , is very important .
In this dance mostly Damru , Naubat , Sankh , Ghadiyal , Jhanjh , Mridang , Dhonsa etc . instruments are played .
The appropriate timing of the vigorous movements of the body parts and the various musical instruments is helpful in the transmission of Raudra-Ras .
It seems as if the world is collapsing , do not know what ` s going to happen .
The instruments are used according to the favorable conditions .
The dance that Lord Shankar performed after killing the demon Tripurasur , that is called Tripur Tandav .
Sandhya Tandav - The dance begins with pathos and concludes with Raudra , the awe-inspiring Ras .
It is said that the Shringar Ras centric dance that Parvati performed in the delight of Tripurasur ` s killing by Lord Shankar is called as ` Lasya Nritya ` .
Woman is considered to be the symbol of aesthetics and tenderness , hence in Laasya dance aesthetics and tenderness are central .
It is said that to give Laasya a heavenly look Lord Krishna started ` Raas Mandal ` .
Laasya manifests the tender feelings of a human being .
Although both women and men can do this dance , but it is more suitable for women .
Bharatanatyam dance is a popular classical dance now not just in South India , but also in North India .
Its relationship has been with the courtesans , and because of them we have been able to get its original form today .
This dance is the multiplicity of mudras .
One can find some plot scattered in it as well , but like Kathak there is no storyline .
The dancer dances alone or in groups of 3-5 in this .
In Bharatanatyam dance the mridangam is used and along with this Carnatic songs are sung or the tunes of Carnatic music played on the musical instruments .
The beginning of Bharatanatyam dance is with the prayer which is called Alapripu .
In this one stands at the position of offering Pushpanjali .
The artist always does this dance facing the audience .
The dance which is done in the second phase of the dance with singing is called Jethiswaram .
Shabdam - In the third phase of the dance literary glorification of the God is done and the king is praised .
The singer sitting next to the musician sings the song and the dancer presents the sentiments of the song through the dance .
Padma - there is a dominance of erotic Bhavjanya movements in this .
Slokam - its seventh and last phase is Slokam .
In this Lord Krishna is worshiped through sanskrit slokas .
This can be done by anyone , male or female .
When a male dancer presents this dance then people call it Kuchipudi dance .
There has been an important contribution of the Devdasis of South-India in sustaining Bharatanatyam .
This art has traditionally been with them .
The teacher of Bharatanatyam is referred as ` Natuvan ` , who teach free of cost .
Kathakali is an ancient and thrilling classical dance of Malabar South India .
The costumes of this dance themselves are its main feature .
This dance is popular in all the regions of India , but in the state of Kerala state it is more publicized .
There is a beautiful combination of music , art and acting in this , so in a simple Kathakali group there are 20-22 people .
Ramayana , Mahabharata or some Puranic story is depicted in this dance .
The actor does not say anything himself .
The character who has the dialogue , he comes on the stage and acts according to the story and his emotions are explained through musical poems from the back .
The act of women is also majorly played by men .
The second specialty of this dance is that in it all nine Rasas are used , although in other dance styles of India Shringar Rasa is majorly used and other Rasas remain subordinate .
At first a prayer to God is made behind the curtain and the characters are introduced .
After that Mradal plays in the same rhythm and then all the musicians play together .
Also , the actor or actress gradually arrive on the stage and according to the part express the emotions through body postures .
Then according to the narrative context his rasas , expressions , mudras , etc keep changing .
Like this all the things of the play are explained in front of the audience by the actor by not saying anything but through his body postures and expressions .
The costumes of Kathakali dancers are also wonderful in its own way .
A tight jacket and a bizarre kind of colorful Ghaghra is worn on the body .
The hair is very beautifully decorated .
In the attire the face makeup is done in a special manner .
According to the character a tilak on the forehead and a round crown is put on the head .
No historical proof of this dance can be found , its birth was when and by whom .
Because of more prevalence in Manipur this is called Manipuri dance .
Looking at its characteristics it seems as if the birthplace of this dance must be Manipur .
This is both classical and folk dance of Eastern Bengal and Assam .
The majority of the dance is done by only girls , but it is not restricted for boys or men .
Manipuri dance is a type of Rasleela .
Manipur is famous for its costumes and make up .
The costumes of this dance are also very attractive and colorful .
Such attractive clothes and ornaments are not found from any other dance-style .
The costume that of the female characters is very attractive and beautiful , which is called ` Patloi ` .
The loose skirt of bright satin or silk fabric is called ` Kumin ` .
There is a very beautiful mosaic of glass and brocade on this .
There is a transparent silk or ` Peshwan ` on top of it .
Usually the gopis wear red colored and Radha wears green colored clothes .
A transparent cloth is worn over the hair as a veil that keeps also the face hidden .
This cloth is extremely transparent hence there is no difficulty to the audience in seeing the expressions of the face .
His face and hands are decorated in different styles .
Immensely attractive ornaments are worn in the hair , ears , arms , and wrists .
The beauty accentuates with beautiful bangles in the hands and flower garlands in the neck , hair and wrists .
A good makeup similar to gopis is done of Krishna also , he is often made to wear nacarat colored apparel .
Manly silk dhoti with Kach and a choli like bandi above and a crown made of peacock feathers is made to wear and different kinds of ornaments and garlands are made to wear .
Kathak Dance is prevalant in the provinces of Uttar Pradesh , Bihar , Bengal , Madhya Pradesh , Rajasthan , Punjab etc .
This is the classical dance of Uttar Pradesh .
Although there is a plotline in the dances also , but in this dance the story is central , hence it is named as Kathak .
Kathak has an ancient tradition .
The statues of dancing women which have been found in the excavation of Mohenjodaro and Harappa , their postures gives an impression of Kathak dance .
In the ancient times there used to be puranic stories by the story tellers in the temple .
When the kirtan used to take place after the story , the Nat folks who were called Bharat used to dance .
After some time because some problems crept in the people of the Nat class , they were sort of excluded from the society .
Hence these Nats started dancing with story narration so that they could have a livelihood .
These Nats themselves were referred to as Kat-thak or Kathak .
Tabla-Pakhawaj are combined in this dance .
In this the conventional Krishna is largely portrayed .
Not just North India , the whole of India is full of folk dances .
In every State one can find its beautiful folk dances , like Garbi and Garba dance in Gujarat , Bhangra dance in Punjab , Chhapeli in Kumaon state .
There is always a natural touch in these dances , there is no artificiality .
Its specialty is to easily express the emotions rising in the human heart .
The beats of the dholak drives away the tiredness from the complexities of life and the daily hard work .
The identity of a folk dance is its traditional costumes , but there is no strict restriction on this .
Now a days , in some classical program along with classical music the programs of folk music -LRB- dances and folk songs -RRB- are also presented to us .
This dance is a popular dance of the state of Gujarat .
In this only women dance in a group .
The dance similar to this which is for men , is called Garbi dance .
The Garba song looks very attractive with the dance of women clapping and in a pleasant winter night with Applaud at a balmy fall night , the women dance and garba song with a catchy sounds .
That day ` the pot of Garba ` a pot of worship is decorated , which looks very beautiful .
` Garbi ` is decorated in every house on the first Navratri .
In the night , at eight-nine o clock after night , after completing the chores at their respective homes , all the women keep it at one place and make a circle around it and perform the ` Garba ` dance till very late at night .
There is one female lead in this dance .
She sings a line of the song first and the other ladies sing after her .
Songs are also sung along with the dance .
The Dholak is also played along .
Now a days modern musical instruments are also used in so many places .
After the dance the prasad is distributed , which is called ` Salhani ` .
This dance goes on for nine days like this .
The last day the ` Garbi ` pot is immersed in the river .
This dance resembles to the Gofa dance of Maharashtra , Rasa of Uttar Pradesh and Kaulatam dance of Andhra Pradesh .
This is also a popular folk dance of Gujarat .
Like Garba is for the ladies , similarly Garbi dance is for the men of that place .
Like Garba Garbi is also concluded for the of worship of the goddess , the only difference is that ` Garba ` is also performed on other occasions and Grabi only on the day of Navratri .
In this a picture of the goddess is kept in the center and near that a lit up lamp and the barley planted in wet soil etc is kept .
The dancers dance around it .
While presenting ` Garbi ` dance the men stay in their Gujarati costumes .
Earthen vessels are not used in ` Garbi ` .
The Bhangra dance of Punjab is an exciting group song which is Veer Rasa dominated , hence speed is central in this .
Although this is a male dance , but sometimes females also perform it , but the combined dance of males and females is not very popular .
This is a folk dance presenting the feeling of exuberance and bravery , hence this dance is performed on happy occasions .
The male dancers put on a colorful lungi , loose shirt , neck wreath , embroidered waistcoat and tie a small turban on the head .
They tie two bright colored scarfs in both hands and perform group dance .
There is no special importance to facial expressions .
Music is produced with Nagada or Dholak .
Actually this is a folk dance of the Bhils of the hilly valleys of Bengal and Assam .
The dancer enters the stage looking for a hunt .
After that many musical instruments are played simultaneously .
To the audience it seems as if he is roaming looking for some sport .
He wipes off the sweat from the forhead after getting tired from the hard work .
Sometimes he expresses the emotion of happiness after sighting the sport and sometimes he is very disappointed when the animal runs off and he drops off unconscious .
The second time he is successful in killing the animal .
After that he enacts of tying the animal to a rope and he drags him away .
With this the dance concludes .
This is a dance of the Kumaon region of Uttar Pradseh .
There are two dancers in this dance .
One is a female and other is a male in this .
There is a combination Hunkaar and Bansuri in this .
Singing with sweet voice also keeps going on with this .
Chhapeli dance is a divine dance of happiness while watching which the audience gets mesmerized .
Kathak dance which is also referred to as Kathak Natwari dance , is one of the main classical dances of North India .
Although Manipuri , Kathakali and Bharatanaty .
That person is considered as a Kathak who presents a story through the medium of acting for public sermon .
One gets the feeling of Kathak dance itself from the statues of Mohenjodaro and Harappa .
There has been a lot of modification in the framework of Kathak dance due to the arrival of Muslims .
Before this the dance that was popular in the whole of India was somewhat like Bharatanatyam .
With the establishment of a Muslim state , dance reached the state courts from the temples of gods and in place of the feeling of devotion romance arose in them .
The result of this was that the entire focus of the dancers went beyond worship and pathetically to mere balancing of the body and slowly it resulted as mere spectacle of the feet .
There was a lot of change also in the costumes of the dancer .
In the pure dance of Radha-Krishna , the feeling of romance came in place of the devotional feeling which satisfied the sexual urges of the courtiers .
Hence the dance gradually got distanced from the civilized society and was reduced just for fun .
Kathak dance was made a separate discipline .
Due to the change of the rulers during the Mughal times , music sometimes got the encouragement and at times was suppressed .
Music almost kind of died during the reign of Aurangzeb .
Music got a lot of encouragement during Akbar ` s times .
Swami Haridas , Tansen , Bajubawra etc . were in his period only .
During the times of the last Nawab Wajid Ali Shah music got new life .
He did not like Kathak much since its a solo dance .
He himself took a good education in music and composed several new thumris with the name ` Lalanpiya ` .
Thakur Prasad was the guru of Wajid Ali Shah to whom he gave 6 cartloads of money as Guru-Dakshina .
It is said that late Thakur Prasad only kept the name of this dance as Kathak Natwari dance .
The beginnings of the Lucknow Gharana is considered to be from late Ishwari Prasad who was the resident of the Handia tehsil of Allahabad district .
According to a legend it is said that Shri Krishna in a dream had instructed him to revive the Kathak Natwari dance .
That moment onwards he got into this work and instructed all his three sons Adguji , Khadguji and Tujguji in music and directed them to revive the dance .
Adguji had three sons - Prakashji , Dayalji and Hiralalji , to whom Adguji gave a good music education .
After his death all his sons came to Lucknow .
There Prakashji became the court dancer of Asif Ud Duala .
Prakashji had three sons , Durga Prasad , Thakur Prasad and Maanji .
These three brothers received great acclaim in dance .
Thakur Prasad was the dance teacher of Nawab Wajid Ali Shah .
His Ganesh Paran was very famous .
Maharaj Kalika Prasad and Bindadin Maharaj were very famous in Thumri recital and composed hundreds of new thumris .
His specialty was that he used to sing thumri and show its emotions with body movements .
Like this showing the expressions became central to the Lucknow Gharana .
Famous singers like Gauharjan and Zohra Bai etc . took the education of thumri from Bindadin Maharaj .
Kalika Prasad had three sons - Jagannath Prasad who got famous as Achhan Maharaj , Baijnath Prasad was famous as Lacchu Maharaj and Sambhu Maharaj .
These three brothers revolutionized the dance world .
Acchan Mahara was a master of gesture , rhythm and tempo .
At the time when Sambhu Maharaj was just eight years old then his uncle and teacher Bindadin died .
At the time of death Bindadin Maharaj gave the responsibility of teaching dance to Sambhu Maharaj to Achhan Maharaj .
Sambhu Maharaj took the education of Thumri from Ustad Rahim Khan of Banaras and stayed with his elder brother Acchan Maharaj in Rampur state for some time and took the education in dance .
After that Sambhu Maharaj came to Lucknow and got busy in popularizing Kathak dance .
Acchan Maharaj died in 1950 .
His only son is Brijmohan Nath who is famous as Birju Maharaj .
He is working in Sangeet Kala Kendra Delhi .
There have been many students of Sambhu Maharaj .
Special attention is given to a good management of the different parts of the body and the movement of the legs .
The establishment of this Gharana happened around 200 years ago by Bhanuji Maharaj .
Bhanuji ` s great grandson Kanhuji , who was adept in Shiva Tandava , came to Vrindavan and took the training in other systems of dancing .
Hanuman Prasad , the great-grandson of Kanhuji had three sons , Mohanlal , Chiraunjilal and Narayan Prasad .
Hanuman Prasad ` s brother Hari Prasad also was very profound in dance .
Hari Prasad in Akashchaari and Chakkardaar Parat and Hanuman Prasad was adept in Laasya dance .
Hanuman Prasad ` s cousin was Chunnilal who had two sons Jailal and Sunderlal .
Both the brothers besides their own gharana took the training in dance from Pandit Bindaddin of the Lucknow gharana .
Like this they became adept in the training of both the gharanas .
Hanuman Prasad ` s other cousins who got acclaim in dance were Shyam lal , Durga Prasad , Govardhanji .
Govardhanji ` s son Khem Chandra Prakash was doing the work of music direction in the films .
Kundan Lal Gangani of this Gharana was a senior teacher in Kathak Kender Delhi .
Hence there was a lot of influence of Tandav in the dance of this gharana .
To dance on tough beats , to show difficult tonal variations , to pronounce hard lyrics during the preparation , to give special importance to the preceding emotion etc is fundamental in this dance style .
Roshan Kumari is the principal contemporary dancer of this gharana .
In this gharana , instead of Lucknow ` s thumri , the emotions of hymns and songs are presented through dance .
There are very few dance artists in this gharana , so people are less familiar with this gharana .
The soul of this gharana is Jaipur gharana .
It is said that Dulharam and his disciple Ganeshi Prasad of the Jaipur gharana went to Banaras and started living there .
This is how the Banaras gharana started .
In this style special attention is given to the originality of the lyrics of the dance , the countenance , preparation , clarity and beauty .
The taps of the tabla and pakhawaj are not used in the dance .
The presidency of International Academy of Arts established in Adiyar was selected in 1926 .
Rukmaniji ` s dance were based on Indian values and used to be spiritual .
The name ` Bharatanatyam ` has been given by her only which is recognized by all .
Earlier the name of this dance was Daasi Attam meaning the dance of the Devdasis or Tanjore dance .
He changed its name and made necessary improvements in its costume .
Late Pandit Sunder Prasad was a famous and learned dancer of the Jaipur gharana .
Pandit Sunder Prasad died on 28 May 1970 in Delhi at the age on 80 years .
Pandit Sunder Prasad got his education in dance from his father Chunni Lal and uncle Durga Prasad .
Not even a single offspring of Pandit Sunder Prasad is alive .
Late Pandit Jailal was the piller of the Jaipur gharana .
Besides his father he took the education in music from his uncle Durga Prasad only .
Pandit Jailal was not just a good dancer , but also a good tabla player .
He had a son Ramgopal and a daughter Jaikumari .
Till his last days in Calcutta Ramgopal was giving lessons in dance .
Jaikumari too was a good and learned dancer .
Pt Jailal was considered a great scholar of rhythm and he was counted among firstly good dancers and on the other hand he was considered a good tabla player .
The very good tabla players of that time used to respect his talent .
His death caused a huge loss to the music world .
Shambu Maharaj ` s father and master was Pt . Kalka Prasad , the piller of the Lucknow gharana .
Kalka Prasad ` s brother Bindaddin was also a famous dancer .
Both dancers had revolutionized the dance-world .
He used to sing thumri while dancing and used to tell its emotions .
He used to express feminine softness and aesthetics with such efficiency that the audience would be mesmerized .
Many thumri singers of that time also learned thumri singing from him .
In a protest against the movie District Ghaziabad , the people associated with Rasam and other social organizations protested infront of the Magistrate ` s office and gave a memorandum to District Administration .
There was a demand to change the name of the movie and to remove the objectionable dialoges .
The chairman of Rasam Sandeep Tyagi said that an attempt to tarnish the image of Ghaziabad has been done in this film , which certainly will not be tolerated at all .
He said that Ghaziabad is a historical town .
But in the film Ghaziabad has been shown as a criminal town , which is not appropriate .
If the name of the film is not changed and objectionable dialogues not removed , there will be a big movement .
Besides the people of Mahendra Fauji and Satbeer Gujjar ` s village Bhaati , Fauji ` s son Rambeer , nephew Mahesh Fauji , uncle Balraj Singh , the chairman of RWUA Colonal Satbir Gujjar , Sanjay Kasyap , BJP leader Indra Nagar many people including Nandkishore were were present .
Salman Khan , Akshay Kumar and Saif Ali Khan , all these three stars could be seen together in a movie soon .
There is a news that director Ramesh Taurani has convinced these three to work together and very soon work will start on this movie .
Although it was not that easy for him to convince all these three .
All the three stars are a superhit these today .
On one hand Sallu is considered as a guarantee for success , on the other hand the demand for rowdy Akshay has also increased .
After Race 2 became a hit , Saif has also joined this race .
Three of them have never worked together .
Saif-Akshay in ` Main Khiladi Tu Anadi ` , and Salman-Akshay ` s pair has come together in ` Mujhse Shaadi Karogi ` , but three of them have not yet been seen together on screen .
Sonakshi Sinha is fed up with her obesity .
The onscreen bubbly Sonakshi although is very pretty but she has to face problems because of her obesity .
It is fine till movies but in the world of advertisement she is not so popular .
The situation is that in the world of advertisement Sona has also got to hear that first she needs to reduce her waist and then do advertisements .
Actually what happened was that Sonakshi got an advertisement offer in which she was told to reduce her weight but as soon as Sona refused this offer was taken back .
Mahi Gill recognized for her cool image on the screen has a different opinion than other actresses about traveling and shopping .
She really likes to roam around and shop on Delhi roads .
She especially enjoys a lot shopping at Janpath .
Mahi Gill who has proved her acting metal in the film ` Sahib Biwi Aur Gangster ` , now in its sequel ` Sahib Biwi Aur Gangster Returns ` is ready to win the heart of the audiences with her strong performance .
Chandigarh ` s Mahi was recently in Delhi for the promotion of the film .
During this time , in an exclusive interview with Dainik Jagran Mahi talked about the interesting experiences in the film and her attachment to Delhi .
Ajay Devgan who is reaching new heights with every film in Bollywood has signed a contract of four hundred crores rupees with an entertainment channel .
According to this the broadcasting rights of all his films releasing till 2018 will be with the channel only .
Before this , Salman Khan also had a similar deal with an another entertainment channel .
Salman had done this agreement for five years was five hundred crore .
Bol Bachchan , Singham , Son of Sardar and the films of Golmaal series earned not only across hundred crore rupees in the theaters but also gained a lot of TRP during television broadcasts .
After this contract , the broadcast rights of Ajay ` s upcoming films Himmatwala , Chakravyuh and the sequel of Singham would remain with this channel .
The broadcast rights of his previous 18 films also is with this channel .
Ajay , shooting for the film Satyagrah , has confirmed the news .
Today ` s inflation is shown through the eyes of a lower middle-class family .
The bottemline is that a person doing a mediocre government job in a small town also can not properly raise his family , there is so much inflation .
Puttan who is working in the animal breeding center is a gourmand sort of father , while he keeps chasing girls like a stalker , is also a brother who repeatedly fails in BA .
Yes , wife is ofcourse supportive , who to increase the income of the household has opened a beauty parlor in the backyard of the house .
There was already a struggle within the family for food and during all this the government scheme of one lakh rupees unemployment loan comes in hand and after that starts the struggle for a new destiny .
There is no doubt that there has been an effort to catch the humor and satire of today ` s times in the film , but clearly the subject matter presented was more suited to the small screen .
If the story of this film was adapted as a soap opera , then there would be chances of an excellent serial .
If the Thakur of Sholay is seen killing Gabbar in the film , or if those dialogues of Gabbar can be listened to which he would have said but not seen in the film .
The fans of Hindi cinema may soon get to see what they were deprived of seeing in the original film due to the objection of the censor board .
Actually , the Indian Censor Board is organizing an entertaining event in New Delhi for a serious discussion on the history of Indian Film Censor Board and its progress in nearly 60 years .
Under it , a festival on the scenes cut from the films by the Censor Board is being organised .
This special film festival , to commemorate the 100 years of Indian cinema , will be held in Delhi in the last week of April .
There is an effort to gather many such deleted scenes for this festival .
The CEO of the Censor Board Pankaja Thankur in an exclusive talk with ` Bhaskar ` said that the film people and the National Film Archive in Pune are being approached for this three-day event which is to be held in Delhi .
Pankaja says that there are a very few fimmakers who keep the scenes cut by the Censor safely .
The legendary jazz artist of the international music world will soon be seen in the capital presenting his program among music lovers .
The third International Jazz Festival is being organised in Delhi this weekend .
In which ten bands of ten nations are coming to participate .
Not only this , the Indian jazz artists emerging on the world jazz music map are also included in the festival under which India ` s four popular bands were seen among their listeners .
This festival which is being organised in Nehru Park , at Chanakyapuri will be held from 15 March to 18 March .
Its webcast also has to be made live to expand the festival , so that the world audience could be able to see its live webcast on digital platform .
Regarding this festival organised by Indian Council for Cultural Relations and the cultural group Seher , the Director of ICCR Suresh Goyal said that after such famous cities as London , Montreal , Stockholm , Idenberg , this festival which is organised at such a big scale has reached the music lovers of Delhi for the third time .
He told that the interest of the people towards Jazz can be understood with the fact that more than ten thousand listeners came to the festival organised the previous year .
Whereas the number of bands is even higher this year .
The famous poet and lyricist Gulzar , to include life experiences in his work , recited some lines among the audience in the ` Spring Fever Festival ` organised here .
As usual in a kurta-pajama , Gulzar who had come to participate in the ` Spring Fever Festival ` recited an urdu poem to the audience but before recital also kept this condition that no one should record the lines of the poem nor officially put on the Internet before its official release .
People will get to see a glimpse of early Indian cinema in an important event to be held in Delhi next month .
The objective of the event is to show and explain to the cinema lovers of the new and the old times in what entertaining manner the films were screened during the era of silent films .
1929 ` s silent film Prapanch Paas will be screened in the official Siri Fort Auditorium in the last week of April .
Recently , National Film Archives situated in Pune has saved this film from destruction and has given it a new form .
It was made by director Franz Austen of a German origin .
Austen made 19 films in India from 1926 to 1939 .
During the screening of this film in Delhi a live orchestra would keep playing the music on the stage .
Information and Broadcasting Ministry has given the responsibility of managing this live orchestra to the well-known classical music celebrity and Sitar player Nishat Khan .
Kolkata resident Nishaat , along with his whole team will give the music and backup during the screening of the film .
Among the several schemes of Information and Broadcasting regarding the organization of the 100 years of Indian cinema , one scheme is that all those film stars living in Delhi who have been felicitated with the Dada Saheb Phalke Award by the Government of India , should be gathered on one stage .
Ministry ` s plan is that the week before the distribution of the National Film Awards by the President in Vigyan Bhavan on May 3 , the event on the 100 years of Indian Cinema should constantly run which should conclude in the function on May 3 .
During this time a play based on the character and philosophy of the classic film personality Dada Saheb Phalke will also be organised whose stage organization and direction will be done by the renowned theater director Amir Raza Hussain .
Jai Bhanushaali and Mahi has won the title of the Star Plus dance reality show ` Nach Baliye 5 ` .
This duo won the title defeating the duo of Ravi Dubey and Sargun Mehta in the grand finale held at Filmistan Studios in Goregaon .
Jay and Mahi ` s pair got 50 million votes .
In the finale , the highlight of the show besides Jay and Mahi were the cast of ` Himmatwala ` , .
The film ` s hero Ajay Devgan and heroine Tamanna Bhatia encouraged the couples .
The winning couple was given Rs 50 lakh as the prize .
The judge of the show Shilpa Shetty also danced in the finale .
After the victory Jay and Mahi said ` We are happy and very touched with the fact that our hard work has paid in the biggest way ` .
Giving the new nuances of fashion to the fashionistas , the ` Wills Lifestyle India Fashion Week Autumn - Winter 2013 ` concluded till the next spring-summer season .
Many experiments with the designs , prints , fabrics , cuts and colors were seen in this five-day fashion gala .
In which few experiments soon after appearing on the ramp reached heights and some proved to be a flop .
The specialty of the season was that this fashion trend got a good response from the buyers .
The fifth and the final day of the fashion week remained about the Indian classical styling .
Designer Vaishali S . stylized the traditional Mekhla sheet of Assam into garments .
About the collection Vaishali says , ` there is a tradition of weaving the Mekhla sheet in every house in Assam ` .
In this situation , with a purpose of getting this tradition international recognition I have presented this fabric with contemporary cuts .
Vaishali used Indian fabrics like Khand , Chanderi and coral silk .
The art of the great painter Picasso was also seen on the ramp on the fifth day with Indian clothing like Jardozi , Chikankaari , Anarkali suits with dori and classic kurtas .
The three periods of Picasso ` s life have been shown in designer Pratima Pandey ` s collection ` Mood Swings ` .
The symbol of Picasso ` s love story ` Rose era ` was shown through flowy garments with rose print .
Blue in ` Blue Era ` and gray in ` Kubistik War ` era were shown in wild style in black costumes .
Designer Ashish - Vikrant has given a contemporary touch using chess checks to traditional clothes like lehanga choli in his collection ` Virtues ` .
Many attractive styles of Gujarat ` s clothing were also seen in the collection .
The dresses with Nawabi look were also popular in the collection .
The effect of Egyptian tombs was seen in designer Charu Parashar ` s collection .
Models ramp walked in the beautiful clothes with Indian work like silk , nalki and aplik .
In the show of Bangalore ` s Rihane , the use of striped inners beneath the flowy net garments was effecti .
Rihane informs that the feminine look is being liked a lot , but is only effective when the look is sharp and crisp .
The models walked the ramp wearing ` black and white ` apparels in Mrinaline ` s collection .
There was a good use of hats also in this .
Chandrani Singh Flora made the models ramp walk in the flowy apparels in pastel colors .
Designer Dhruv-Pallavi played with solid colors like red and black , whearas Kiran-Meghna gave preference to geometric prints .
A time machine was seen on the clothes : Designer Nida Mahmood presented her collection on the ramp with the combination of drama and live music .
Nida gave a presentation inspired by a fictional character ` Captain Mastkalandar ` .
This ` Motorised Flying Ant ` collection , which is fond of traveling , appeared in print on all garments .
A model like Randhawa when appeared on the ramp wearing the dress with the time machine look , the audience got excited .
In the grand finale of Badal Jhoome : the filtered light coming from the clouds .
The Sun peeking from the clouds .
Ready to rain , black clouds .
These different moods of the clouds were seen in designer Manish Arora ` s clothes .
The glamour of the grand finale doubled with Manish ` s clothes .
The instrumental music of thousands of watts and live laser light show made the presentation hi-tec .
Manish informs that there is a combination of Indian and Western designing in this .
There was a good yield of pumpkins in the fields of Ramlal .
The neighbors did not like this thing .
One day a neighbor came to their door early morning .
He said - `` Ramlal Bhaiya , a man has put holes in your pumkins ` .
But I went to see those yesterday , all the pumpkins were kept fine then .
No brother , I have seen a man doing this in the night .
OK , who was that m ?
Saying this Ramlal proceeded towards the pumpkins .
Oh him , your old foe Khyaali Ram .
In the meanwhile they reach the farm while talking .
Ramlal started saying - Brother , the pumpkins look all fine .
Right then his neighbor picked up a pumpkin and showed its lower portion - look , this is the hole he pierced .
There would be similar holes in all .
Ramlal thought that how does he know that these fruits have been pierced , that too in the night .
The Ram Lal filed a report against his neighbor and told Khyaali Ram - you got away from being trapped .
The Sufi compositions of the Indian and Pakistani artists in the evening adorned with sufi music forced the delhi people to get ecstatic .
The beginning of the two day Sufi festival organised in Delhi happened with the presentations of many fine and talented artists .
When the legendary artists of India and Pakistan gave their performance on stage among music lovers in Indira Gandhi National Centre for Arts , everyone praised them .
Pakistani singer Sanam Marvi mesmerized everyone with her music .
Mumbai ` s Ghanshyam Vaswani also charmed people with his singing .
Both presented the compositions of spiritual Sufis like Shah Abdul Latif Bhitti .
Kathak dancers also entertained the audience with dance skills .
Kathak dancer Namrata Pamnani gave a beautiful dance performance .
She mesmerized everyone with the dance and song recital of the compositions by the saints .
Her performance , full of energy , was also brimming with enthusiasm , which was also appreciated a lot by the audience .
The audience enjoyed the beautiful lines of the sufi poetry and sufi compositions .
Most of the audience will laugh if the hindi film hero is seen saying ` charan sparsh ` or ` Pitaji paon laagun ` on the screen .
That hero when says `` Pairi pauna fathher `` on screen , then we do not get amazed .
This seems natural to us .
Actually , due to the constant presence of Punjab in Hindi movies , we have become used to Punjabi style , music and dialogues .
A large portion of Hindi films is covered with Punjabi culture and influence .
At times Kareena Kapoor ` s Punjabi style in Jab We Met became the obsession of girls from across the country and sometimes Sunny Deol in the role of Tara Singh in Gadar became an obsession with young guys .
Not just this , the record of the country ` s longest running film is also in the name of Dilwale Dulhania Le Jaayenge , which was a film purely based on the Punjabi - NRI assimilation .
Whether these are multiplex movies like Vicky Donor , Band Baja Baraat , Patiala House , Khosla ka ghosla , Do Duni Chaar or pure masala movies like Singh is Kinng , Dil Bole Hadippa , Yamla Pagla Deewana , Son of Sardar or art movies like Maachis and Pinjar . whenever Punjabiness was seen in the films in bollywood , those were a hit .
The situation today is that in most of Bollywood ` s film songs the influence of music is a lot apparent , even though the subject matter of the film is not even remotely connected to Punjab .
Yes , whatever may be the setting of the film , it has atleast one song in Punjabi nowadays .
If not the entire song then atleast a paragraph , a sentence or a word is definitely there .
Between Bulle Shah and Balle-Balle there came a period , when the use of the word ` Mahi ` came in vogue .
Till today this word is being used in songs in Hindi films .
The songs of Bulle Shah is liked by all kinds of listeners .
Not just music , one can see a remarkable influence of Punjab in the traditions important to the family .
Punjab has come especially in the rites of marriage everywhere .
If there is a wedding , be it any part of the country , henna and music has become a necessary part of it .
Now a days whether its films , or an album or a family function , one does not enjoy without punjabi music .
The people attending the wedding are seen dancing around the groom , with both the hands raised lifting a finger and a leg on some Punjabi tune .
Even to an extent that the resonance of Punjabi tunes is heard from Gujarat ` s Garba to the fairs of Bihar .
` Balle - balle ` and ` Chak de Phatte ` have become common idioms to express delight .
Relished by the tongue , the Punjabi Tadka - this Punjabi connection with the Hindi films was not there since the begining .
The Punjabis who came from Pakistan after the partition of the country spread throughout the country for livelihood .
Despite going through the trauma of the Partition , they did nor lose the passion for their folk music .
Also they retained their taste .
They attracted the people of all the states through the wonderful flavors of tandoor and tandoori through dhabas and restaurants .
If you ask your elders then you would know that in the beginning of the sixth decade in every city restaurants named Punjab , New Punjab , Sardar came up rapidly and dhaba culture was born around the main stops on the national highway .
These dhabas and restaurants have an important role in popularizing tandoori roti and chicken to lassi and Patiala peg .
The importance increased after migration - In the movies along with the filmmakers and technicians who migrated from Lahore , Punjab also came to Mumbai .
Even today most of the filmstars , filmmakers and technicians in Hindi films are the citizens who came from the Punjab of north - west India , whether their surname is Khan or Kapoor .
They spread the incense and culture of their land .
In movies through stories , characters and music it was taken to the masses .
If you notice then you will find that in Hindi films the names of the actors are mostly Kapoor , Malhotra , Khanna and Chopra .
Under the guidance of BR Chopra and Yash Chopra , all the filmmakers who had come from Punjab presented Punjab in some or the other way in their films .
The story of BR Chopra ` s film Naya Daur was not of Punjab , but there was Punjabiness in its music .
Even before that Yash Chopra ` s Waqt was a movie made with the background of Punjab , which had the incidents of brothers getting separated due to partition and then meeting again .
Yash Chopra gave many ideas to Hindi movies through Waqt .
Among them one was also Punjabiness .
Almost all the heroes of a Yash Chopra film come from the land of Punjab .
This is not at all wrong but their popularity and influence has encouraged other filmmakers to use the music and dialogues from Punjab .
Who can forget the scenes with mustard fields of his fil ?
The prosperous and lush green Punjab encouraged the screen of Hindi cinema .
There was an immense attraction to the Punjabi style of dance and celebration .
The whole nation was forced to dance on the tune of Bhangra Beats , drum and balle-balle .
There is a tremendous flair in the music of Punjab .
When the singers sings it in their elevated voice , there settles a delight through the effortlessness .
Sukhwinder ` s voice fills any song with energy and vigor .
These days Mika is everyone ` s favorite .
The times of Daler Mehandi is also memorable .
It would be unfair to say that the artists and filmmakers of Punjab enforced Punjabiness under a strategy .
They just presented the merits of their popular culture and the general audience and listeners kept on accepting it .
This popular culture can be a subject of study and research .
There goes a joke in the Mumbai film industry that Punjabi culture is our national culture .
In today ` s time Salman Khan has become the khan of hit films .
His funda of choosing and doing films is also very clear .
He says , `` The style in which the audience like to see me , I can not do anything different from that `` .
This does not mean that I will keep working only with established people .
If some new director or story writer impresses me with his story then I will definitely sign that film .
This is the reason why Salman has stopped working with a particular director or actress .
Once David Dhawan had made 7-8 movies with him .
Does Salman not want that they should be paired and it should become a h ?
On this Salman says , `` Definitely I want this , but if a friend beings an ordinary script I would not do it `` .
If a director gets a good script then I will do it .
New people have more enthusiasm .
I select people to make a movie .
Sometimes Arbaaz , sometimes Atul and sometimes someone else .
The script of Chillar Party was good , was a children ` s movie , I liked it .
Presented it under the banner of Being Human .
I keep telling this to Suhail also that now not the stars but the script has become important .
This is the reason why guidelines have been issued to improve the script more .
Anyone get jealous looking at the plush lifestyle of the filmstars .
It can be said that they have no problems in life .
Hence they would hardly care for the needy .
The personalities accustomed to five star facilities at home , air-conditioned car and office would hardly hardly come out on dusty roads to become a part of some campaign .
But this is not so in reality .
Whether it is Delhi Gang rape case or the Anna movement , the Narmada Bachao movement or the protest against female infanticide or any other kind of public awareness campaign , the stars are associating themselves to the system to all kinds of social goals .
Their presence in movements - campaigns is inspiring , exciting the common people to open a front against corruption , poverty and malnutrition .
Relating to the issues - last year fulfilling his responsibility towards social issues Aamir Khan through his show ` Satyamev Jayate ` tried to awaken both the government and the people on various issues .
He even went to meet the Chief Minister of Rajasthan in the cases related to female infanticide and generic drugs .
The result of that effort was visible .
The government of Rajasthan and many other states have geared up for the prevention of female foeticide .
The people got to know about generic drugs .
There is a lot of work going on for its campaign .
He familiarized the public on various issues including alcoholism , child labor , dowry with intensive research work through his show .
Instead of earning profits through the show , he got the show broadcasted on Doordarshan without any contracts so that his message reaches the villages also .
Fulfilling one ` s responsibility towards the society .
Earlier he fought for the rights of the rehabilitation-affected in the Narmada Bachao Andolan also with Medha Patekar .
These days he is associated with UNICEF ` s malnutrition prevention campaign , building Incredible India and Jan Lokpal campaign also .
The ambassadors of economy - Amitabh Bachchan of Gujarat and Shah Rukh Khan has become the brand ambassador of Bengal .
The numbers suggest that after these filmstars were appointed brand ambassadors the tourism of the respective territories increased .
Especially Gujarat has exploited the popular image of Amitabh Bacchan in a planned and systematic manner and has attracted countrymen along with foreigners also .
In the past two years , more than 20,000 rooms have come up in the hotels of Gujarat .
It is well known that Big B did not take any fees to give Gujarat his name .
Jaya Bachchan is already giving her contribution in active politics as Rajya Sabha member .
She is from Bhopal , hence the government there is hoping that Abhishek Bachchan becomes the brand ambassador of that place which would promote tourism .
More and more foreign tourists should visit the states and there should develop new job possibilities in the country .
For this reason itself besides Arunachal Pradesh , the officials of Bihar has also sent their request to Aamir Khan to become the brand ambassador of that place .
Big B is also the brand ambassador in UNICEF ` s polio eradication campaign .
On the road of charity - despite being labeled as a bad boy and careless , everyone is aware of Salman Khan ` s generosity .
His organization Being Human helps the needy with full devotion through the money collected by selling its products .
Besides this they also keep helping people by charity shows here and there .
In an advertisement aired on the television `` Jab padega India , tabhi toh badega India `` , Anupam Kher is making an effort to campaign for the education of resource-less children .
He also has recently donated his land to an NGO working in this direction .
He remained an active worker in the Anna movement in the matter of the appointment of the Lokpal .
The slogan of female empowerment - By associating with the National Sanitation Program ` Nirmal Bharat ` recently , Vidya Balan has taken the responsibility of the task of making the people aware about sanitation .
Under this campaign , she will visit houses and make people aware about cleanliness as much as possible .
Shabana Azmi has been associated with active community service since a long time .
She is working for the betterment of her native village through her NGO Mijwan Welfare Society .
She is striving for the empowerment of girls in rural India .
Mr. India Anil Kapoor did wonders not just in the films , but in real life too is working to eliminate a big social evil .
She is working in the Save the Girl Child drive by associating with the ` Because I am a Girl ` campaign .
The name of Shah Rukh Khan is also included in the people who wish to do something towards the society .
He worked without any fee with renowned advertisement and film director R . Balki in a short film based on current social issues , which was released on Women ` s Day .
The voice of the voiceless - along with humans the stars are also concerned about the interest of the animals .
That is why many famous actresses are associated with the organization working to save the animals , ` PETA ` .
Celina Jaitley always participates very actively in this direction .
She has tried to tell that keeping the animals in cages is like exiling them to Kala Paani .
Artists like Asin and Vidyut Jamwal are also ready to help people .
Did this madness about the authors or the fondness to meet them was ever seen befo ?
Answering to a question , Harvijay Singh Wahia , the organizer of the Taj literature festival which was held right after the Jaipur Literature Festival , said `` ofcourse it was observed , but then the people did not have the platform to meet their authors `` .
Jaipur Literature Festival -LRB- JLF -RRB- not only provided this stage , but also showed a way to start literature festivals like this in other parts of the country as well .
The result of this is that including JLF more than 32 schemes of literature festivals have been made in different parts of the country this year .
This is the increasing demand of the literature market only that the Delhi World Book Fair which is organised every three years by the National Book Trust was organised consecutively in the second year itself .
In the future also it is expected to happen every year .
After listening to Harvijay Singh the memories of one - one and a half decade ago freshened up , when people who sit for hours covered in a blanket in the winter nights , to listen to Gopaldas Neeraj and Harivansh Rai Bachchan in some poet conference .
The whole of the pandal would start crying listening to Bharatbhusan ` s very famous poem Ram ki Jal Samadhi at Lucknow ` s Begum Hazrat Mahal Park , or in Lucknow itself the panchayat of Amritlal Nagar would gather for hours at Raja ` s cold drink shop at the square .
This fan-following of the poets , coming out from Hindi states , has also been seen in an institutional manner in states like Maharashtra , Tamil Nadu and West-Bengal , where people associated with literature get more respect than politicians .
The Marathi literature conference which is organised every year is a living example of this , where along with the Chief Minister the entire cabinet is seen keen to attend it .
In the literature conference held in North East India ` s Guwahati people have been taking their kids to have blessings from the writers .
But the reason behind the apparent flood of literature festivals these days is somewhat different .
Acknowledging this the senior writer and JLF ` s regional adviser Nand Bhardwaj says , `` similar to the other mediums of media literature festivals are also a form of the market only `` .
Like other parts of the media , here as well the organizers want to earn some profits cashing on people ` s interest towards literature through sponsorships .
The can also be understood through truth of Nand Bhardwaj ` s this statement , by looking at the way of reaching heights .
When in 2005 the Indian author Namita Gokhale and British historian William Dalrymple together laid the foundation of the Jaipur Literature Festival , then that year in that festival mere 14 people attended .
William Dalrymple had together laid the foundation of the Jaipur Literature Festival , then that year mere 14 people attended that festival .
William himself admits that most of them were foreign tourists who had come to visit Jaipur , who had coincidentally became part of the celebration .
Even in this festival organised in 2006 with some more preparations , the Diggi Darbar Hall of the Diggi Palace Hotel could hardly fill up .
But in 2007 about 400 people came to this festival and Darshan Singh Construction LTD . -LRB- DSC -RRB- named company , undertaking the work of Jaipur metro train took over its sponsorship .
The number of people coming to JLF in 2012 crossed over 120,000 .
According to the presenter of JLF Sanjay Roy more than 180,000 people attended the festival this year , and its cost exceeded five and a half crores .
Maithili ` s well-known writer Vibharani who had came to participate in JLF says , only intelligentsia come in such events , so companies do not want to stay behind in making their presence felt among such people .
Perhaps this is the reason why besides DSC more than 25 companies like Tata Steels , Google , Airtel , Coca-Cola , Vodafone , Taj , Oberoi and Rajasthan tourism have joined as the sponsors of this festival .
Obviously , if such events did not come with a silver lining - then why would new festivals and new organizers come p ?
Beyond the market also - agreeably some people have started developing it as a market after recognizing the vein of literature .
But its bright side are also coming up .
In the recently held two major events - the Jaipur Literature Festival and the Taj Literature Festival , a massive crowd of the same youth generation was seen who have been blamed for inheriting a bad culture by running away from the books , staying glued to the television and visiting pubs .
Such questions have been asked by these young listeners in the various sessions of JLF that even the seniors would be seen biting their nails .
With this perspective these literature festivals are giving a platform with a new direction to the youngsters .
Namita Gokhale says , through JLF we have been able to take the books out of the upper-class intellectuals and have succeeded in bringing them to the common man .
Professor Karunashankar Upadhyay , the head of the department of Hindi of Mumbai University , believes that the youth is seen associating with these festivals also because through special media like facebook and blog he is himself also trying to write something or the other .
They have found a new medium of expression , whereas a few years ago magazines and books were the only means of expression , and its still not possible to publish everyone ` s ideas in those .
For the youngsters having such interests , the literary class is no less an attraction than actors of some movie or television .
Open discussion forum - If one believes Namita Gokhale while the other sources of media are busy trying to create sensation , these literature festivals are becoming a medium of serious debate .
Where four intellectuals meet , there a clash of ideas and discussions are obvious .
Perhaps such intellectual discussions were called as Sashtratha in ancient India .
No instance of any sort of political regulation is seen or heard of on such polemics .
JLF has been in the news for such polemics right since the beginning , such debates had started in the Taj literature festival also in the first year of its event .
On the second day of JLF , when Professor Kancha Ilaya , thinker of the dalit viewpont , regarded Hinduism as the root of inequality and the solution of all problems in Buddhism , then sitting among the audience gazal lyricist and film writer Javed Akhtar immediately cut his statement and said that the vulnerable section and women nowhere have got equal rights .
Right on the next day after this incident , one statement of sociologist Ashish Nandy caused fury in the whole country .
A one sided debate has been going on regarding women ` s freedom and security right after Delhi rape case .
Giving this debate a new direction actress Shabana Azmi clearly said in a session that it is one thing for women to get equal right , but presenting their body as a commodity can not be supported at all .
Publisher ` s benefit - there was a Rs . 21 crore business during the Kolkata Literary Meet held during the JLF and the Taj Literature Festival .
In the Delhi World Book Fair , France which is considered as the leader in the publishing industry was invited as the Guest of Honour , where in the year 2011 a total of 81000 books were published , in which 42000 books were new .
In terms of technology and business , the Indian publishing industry has started thinking to learn from abroad .
Ashok Maheshwari of Rajkamal Publications in India says that the new generation has the tendency to learn .
Hence looking at their interests the publishing business has gone beyond stories and poems and has started publishing books on management , health , lifestyle and career and through the increasing literature festivals the opportunities to make people reach the books have increased .
His son Alind associated with Rajkamal ` s sales department says , the sale of books has increased now because the books have started reaching people through internet also .
Some publishers have also started selling hindi books keeping them in Pre-Order -LRB- booking the order before publication -RRB- .
Delhi ` s Hind Yugm Prakashan kept three hindi books on pre - order in the last three months of 2012 .
These three books sold out so much on pre-order itself that the online shopping website Infibeam termed it a best seller .
Shailesh Bharatvaasi , 30-year-old director of the Hind Yugm believes that there has been an emergence of a new middle class in the country these days , who can go beyond food and housing and can spend on luxury also .
This class itself goes to these literature festivals and also buys books .
But the possibility of benefit to vernacular authors through these book fairs and literature festivals still seems bleak .
Nand Bhardwaj admits that all these festivals are a mechanism to push for the publishing business , not for the author .
Supporting Bhardwaj ` s view Ashok Maheshwari also considers these celebrations as cut out from the roots of Indian culture .
Wahia claims of eradicating this shortcoming and says that opposite JLF in the Taj Literature festival he is trying to keep the local culture in the center .
On the other hand justifying the influence of englishness in JLF Vibarani questions that when the authors of the several States of India would want to express the literary activities of their state on a single platform , then they should speak in which language that the audience sitting infront of them would understand them .
Anyway , if something happens , then only it would be criticized .
At least this growth which has come in the literary market in India is showing the growing literacy in India .
Looking for Mr . Right - there are a lot of rumors but Anushka rubbishes all such link ups with Ranveer Singh .
She says , I ` m single and the search for Mr . Right is on .
For me Ranveer is just a good friend .
We were both new at the time of Band Baja Barat and we had no friends in the industry .
At that time we both spent more time together , to which people gave some other name .
So is there really no one in Anushka ` s life right n ?
The answer is somewhat vague , I have wanted that I should also have a love story , but in the last one and a half year there has been a change , clarity and maturity in my thinking .
I think that I have grown up so I ` m looking for a partner who accepts me as I am .
He gives me full respect , understands me .
Does not use my weaknesses against me .
Although I do not at all have the time to explore such a boy .
Such a man is hard to come by , but I ` m in no hurry .
Two fishermen would go fishing far away in the river everyday .
Not a single fish was caught into their trap in the last three - four days , so they both were upset .
One day , carrying the net , they had just reached in the middle of the river when they saw a big figure floating .
Is it a crocodi ?
Both spoke together .
Madan named fisherman said to the other , friend Gopal , this crocodile should not become the cause of our death .
Thinking this the two decided to return home .
When they arrived their homes , they saw that their families are very worried because of hunger .
Madan ` s son was very hungry , and Gopal on the other hand was getting upset thinking about the next day ` s routine .
Gopal was thinking just that when his gaze went on the wall .
He saw that a spider was trying to climb over the wall for a while , but due to the smooth wall again and again slips , but did not want to try spider .
After continuous efforts it finally managed to climb the wall .
Looking at this scene , Gopal ` s confidence increased .
He thought that if a spider does not leave courage despite losing several times , then we are still human beings .
He decided that he too will not not accept defeat .
The next day Gopal got up early with this hope and reached Madan .
He told the spider story to Madan also .
After that the two dressed up and started from the house .
Again , both of them arrived at the river for fishing .
Exhibiting courage both the fisherman reached the middle of the river carrying the net .
There again they saw that huge figure , but this time they fearlessly put the net on it .
After a lot of hard work when he pulled up the net , then they saw not a crocodile in it , but a giant goldfish was stuck .
Seeing this , both screamed with happiness .
The huge figure that they were afraid of till now , that itself became the reason of their success .
It is rightly said that courage is the secret of success .
The Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh Akhilesh Yadav said that literature only shows way to the society .
Writers keep enhancing the image of the society through their writings .
Hopefully they will trying in this direction itself .
He was addressing the annual awards ceremony given by Hindi Sansthan , Uttar Pradesh on Friday .
The awards of the year 2009 , 2010 and 2011 were given to the writers , at the ceremony organised in the YashPal Auditorium .
Bharat - Bharti Award 2009 to author Dr . Maheep Singh , Mahatma Gandhi Award 2009 to Dr Kamal Kishore Goenka , Hindi Gaurav Award 2009 to Dr . Sarla Shukla , Mahatma Gandhi Award 2010 to Maitreyi Pushpa , Hindi Gaurav Awards 2010 to KP Saxena , Bharat - Bharti Awards 2011 to Govind Mishra , Mahatma Gandhi Award 2011 to Nasira Sharma and Shri Krishna Tiwari was awarded the Hindi Gaurav Awards 2011 .
Dr. Kailash Vajpayee could not reach due to being unwell .
He was to be given Bharat Bharati Award for 2010 .
On this occasion , a seminar was also organized on the theme ` contemporary society and the responsibility of Hindi Sansthan ` .
On this poet Shri Krishna Tiwari said that there are many aspects of the society .
Literature has to make balance between traditions , beliefs and politics etc .
Other writers presented her views along with Maitreyi Pushpa .
Reliance studio is an advanced place for shooting in Mumbai ` s Film City .
One gets the illusion of Hollywood soon after entering the complex .
The rent of one day is Rs one lakh twenty five thousand .
The set of Inder Kumar ` s ` Super Nanny ` is set up and the shooting would go on till thirty days .
The movie is inspired from a Gujarati play .
Rekha is in the central role and her old co-star Randhir Kapoor is in the role of her husband .
The story is of a homely woman , who worked all her life for the family , but the family does not care about her .
All the members assume that she does not have any desires or dreams of her own .
This is a traditional image and has recently been seen in ` English Vinglish ` .
The woman ` s grandson is a successful fashion photographer in the U . S . and when that grandson comes home in the vacations he inspires his grandmother that there is no requirement to live a maid ` s life forever .
He after making radical changes in her personality gets her pictures published and she becomes successful in the modeling world .
Now she has her own job , her own name and money .
With this new star status she changes the cumbersomeness of the whole family .
She also rectifys the casanova nature of her husband .
Like his hit film ` Beta ` , Inder Kumar is trying to make this film also emotion-centric along with funny dramatic situations and the script is so amusing that Randhir Kapoor wanted to make it for RK .
The message of the film is clear that women can not be just kept in the boundaries of the household work and economic independence is necessary for the development of her personality .
However , twenty-five years ago , Sachin made a film called ` Aatmvishwaas ` in Marathi , in which a middle class family in Dadar area is losing its moral values in the influence of modernity and the husband also wants to sell the house and is eager to have his own business .
The voice of the lady of the house is also curbed and people are behaving arbitrarily .
One day the woman ` s childhood friend returns from abroad and observing the condition of the house gives her friend a talisman after wearing which her problems would go away and her confidence which is lost in the chores of the household would return .
The next day she takes all the aspects of the family in her hands and transforms the family in a few days .
The members getting disillusioned sober up , and the selling of the house gets canceled .
After some time the friend returns , she has to go to South Africa again .
The time has come to halfheartedly return the talisman .
Her friend said that there is no power in the talisman , that she bought it from a market in South Africa just like that .
Actually , she had narrated the concocted story about the power of the talisman to her , so that her confidence returns somehow .
She had seen her friend ` s abilities and leadership capability in youth in college .
She had let herself become the flour in the mill of the household and her confidence was lost .
She became the horse that pulls the mere chariot of the husband and children ` s wishes and keeps getting lashes on the back .
The day she took the whip in her hand , everything went fine .
It is worth an attention that Sachin ` s Marathi film ` Aatmvishwaas ` , Balki ` s ` ` English Vinglish ` and Inder ` s ` Super Nanny ` are the three forms of the same story , the basis is the same .
The talisman of confidence , Sridevi ` s ability to speak English in the film and Inder Kumar ` s film becomes successful modeling .
One film is set in Mumbai , the second in Chennai and third in Gujarat , whatever be the region and its political and economical condition , the woman is repressed , is subjugated only .
These three films reveal the deep-seated feudal mentality in male attitudes .
These three keep attacking a man ` s ancient prejudice but that rock of a man ` s thinking is so strong that all waves of change go in vain .
Sachin ` s ` Aatmvishvaas ` is a story of lower-middle class , ` English Vinglish ` is a rich resourceful class .
Inder kumar has also chosen the same setting .
The condition of women have stayed the same in all the sections .
The women have relatively more freedom in the slums and tribes due to less hypocrisy .
The lower economical class and the tribes are free of the obscure rituals of the weddings and the ostentation related to it .
The middle class has been more frustrated .
When a class is in the position to see unlimited dreams , then economic depression and lack of resources give birth to frustrations .
Now after the television reaching the remote places , wishes and dreams are arising more or less everywhere .
The television operated by private channel is a snake that fulfills wishes .
However , sixty-year-old Rekha has got the central role and in her middle age she has played that wife in a Rakesh Roshan film whose husband tried to murder her in the lure of money .
After surviving , she comes in a new role and teaches him a lesson .
Actually this format of the narrative is centuries old .
This was presented for the first time in cinema in Chandulal Shah ` s ` Gun Sundari ` -LRB- 1925 -RRB- .
The roles come if one survives in this industry , like in cricket one would make runs if one stays on the wicket .
The charisma of Rekha ` s style is the same even today .
Secretary Farzana keeps lingering around her like a Satellite .
However , in a book function there was vermilion on Rekha ` s head , which was reminding of lines from Dharamvir Bharati ` s Kanupria ` Although You tied me in your arms , but why did you deprive me of history ` .
Somewhere the ` Lipstick Print ` made on a one piece dress were telling the story of the feminine side of a woman ` s personality .
And somewhere the ` Metal Embellishment ` of the trousers were highlighting the dark side of their personality .
Similar scenes were seen on the ramp on the first day of Wills Lifestyle India Fashion Week ` Autumn Winter 2013 ` in Hall No . -18 of Pragati Maidan .
The designs of several designers were seen revolving around female personality .
Many leading fashion designers attended this fashion fair .
Masaba Gupta who was opening the Week attracted the highest applaud .
Many discrete experiments with prints were seen in Masaba ` s collection .
Abstract usage like telephone booth and dispersed ink besides lipstick print were looking very different .
Speaking about her designs Masaba says that my collection is connected to the beautiful feeling and joy of femininity .
Besides earthy colors like gray Masaba had also effectively used neon colors .
Similarly , in Kanika Saluja Chaudhary ` s collection ` Anaika ` the dark side of a woman ` s personality was highlighted .
In Kanika ` s show , the models were seen in outfits with heavy metal embellishments .
Kanika says that if a woman can be good , she could be bad also .
Based on this concept , the beginning of the show were made by the models wearing pastel colors , but gradually the colors became darker and eventually all of the costumes were black .
Notched jewelry was also exhibited in this show about which Kanika had to say that this is inspired from cactus which is very ` tough ` .
Similarly , a woman also keeps the passion to face difficult situations .
The dark side of a female personality was also the focus of designer Siddharth Tytler .
Everyone was stunned when in the begining of Siddhartha ` s show a model wearing a mask walked past the audience Dheerga .
After that the models catwalked in glittery black garments .
The cobra shaped cap on the head of the final model remained the topic of discussion .
Similarly , designer Vineet Bahl portrayed the status of women in the Nawabi culture of Awadh in his collection Awadh .
The models wore salwar - kurta and saris with traditional work like chikankari and embroidery in the collection .
Whereas designer Nikasha presented her collection ` The Queen of Night ` .
She said that my creations are Indian , but they can be worn anywhere in the world .
The use of fabrics like silk , Banarasi brocade and chiffon was seen in his clothes .
The use of ` french knots ` was also seen a lot .
Designer Namrata Joshipura in her collection Wings of Desire showed the women ` s tendency to live in the present .
Fabrics like glazed microfabric , polytex and neoppreen have been used in the collection .
Pankaj and Nidhi used dark colors on their show .
Of music metal : the amount of hardwork that is put in the collection , the same is done on research background music .
When in fashion designer Kanika Saluja ` s show the models ramp-walked wearing the dresses with ` metallic embellishments ` in the show then the music with the sound of metal rang up .
Similarly , when the models were ramp-walking in typical Indian style IN Vineet bahl ` s show , then the songs like Bawra mann , Chanda Re . played up .
Jaywant Dalvi ` s famous play `` Evening Shade `` that highlights the state of the growing nuclear families and elderly in the metropolitans was staged in the Muktadhara auditorium by Reflection Art Mirrors .
This play has been taken from the background of 1971 .
In which the loneliness and the emotional state of an elderly couple has been expressed .
The play along with entertaining the audience with the different scenes and dialogues , also compels to think this that what is the priority of today ` s generati ?
Moreover , this also raises a question on the current social set-up .
The theory-maker and director Rajesh Babbar presented all the scenes beautifully .
In one scene , the clash of two generations is presented , which shows the poignancy of the increasing loneliness in nuclear families .
Rajiv Gupt , Hari Semwal , Nishant Bharati , Mukesh Deepak Sharma , Manju Hunda and Pradeep Guatam gave an emotional performance on the stage .
Finally , the announcement of giving Pran the highest honor of the Indian Cinema Dada Saheb Phalke Award was made .
Since 2004 , every year at the time of the announcement of Phalke Award a discussion on his name was made , but year by year other veterans were honored and Pran ` s fans kept getting disappointed .
Pran never expressed displeasure at being sidelined like this , but the entire film industry kept feeling that its getting late in giving him the award .
Better late than never . .
Pran would be given this award on coming 3rd March on the occasion of completion of hundred years of Indian Cinema .
Pran who did more than 400 films in his career spanning six decades , had retired from the cinema in 1998 .
Pran had attitude and style since the beginning only .
Wali Muhammad Wali was very impressed with his style of putting the pan and chewing it infront of Ram Lubhaya ` s pan-shop in Lahore .
He spotted his villain in Pran .
They did not talk much .
Just convinced him for the punjabi film written by him , Yamla Jat .
Pran did not look back after that .
For his third film ` Khandaan ` , Pran got the role of the hero opposite Noor Jahan .
However , when Pran saw the film he rejected himself .
He realized that he is not suiting in the role of the hero .
He always mentioned in his biography and interviews that he had difficulty in singing the songs and running behind the heroine .
He did not like both these two things necessary for the acting of a hero on himself .
Pran had done more than 20 films in Lahore before the partition of India .
The atmosphere was deteriorating since one year before the independence .
Estimating the damage , he sent his wife and son to Indore .
At the insistence of his wife to join his son ` s first birthday he reached Indore on August 10 , 1947 and then could never return to Lahore again .
He came to Mumbai borrowing some money from the relatives .
Here after waiting for eight months , with the recommendation of Sadat Hasan Manto , Shyam and Cuckoo he got a film of Bombay Talkies .
Remuneration was fixed at Rs 500 .
His first film in India was ` Jiddi ` with Dev Ananad .
From then until 1998 he was seen in various roles in the movies .
Pran played the role of a villain with almost all of the heroes of his times .
One gets goosebumps even today recalling Gajendra in Dilip Kumar ` s ` Ram Aur Shyam ` .
He added a new color of villain-ness in every film .
He seemed dangerous and evil when he used to speak the words clearly .
But when Manoj Kumar gave him a jovial role in `` Upkaar `` , then he changed his image .
For the first time producers-directors felt that he could play supporting and character roles also .
In Amitabh Bachchan ` s ` Zanjeer ` , he played the memorable role of Sher Khan .
In Amitabh ` s words only Pran gave life to the Hindi cinema through his artistry .
On the last day of the Annual function G-Kumar 2013 in Galgotia College situated in Knowledge Park , famous singer and music director Vishal and Shekhar made the students to dance a lot giving an awesome performance .
As soon as they reached the stage , Vishal and Shekhar doubled the enthusiasm of the song by playing ` Bachna aay haseeno , lo main aa gaya . .
After that , the fun that had begun went on for long .
They made everyone their fans by playing songs including Anjaana Anjaani , I Hate Love Story and Tujhe Bhula Diya and other songs .
There , the winning students of all the institutions participating in the three-day annual function G - Kumar were announced .
The CEO of the institute Dhruv Galgotia felicitated the winners .
On the occasion of Women ` s Day , Shahrukh Khan expressing his respect to the women of the film industry film industry said that in the beginning of the movie the name of the heroine should be before the hero .
He feels that the actresses are still not able to get their right .
Shahrukh says , ` I would like to request all to show the name of the actress first in the film ` .
We are initiating this from ` Chennai Express ` , in which Deepika ` s name would be shown before .
She is also very excited about this .
Although I know that this won ` y make a big difference , but this can definitely bring change in people ` s thinking .
Shahrukh also feels that due to the announcement of the name of the best actor at the end of the awards ceremony , only they remain the center of attraction , which is not right .
He said , ` the announcement of the best actress award should be at the end of the ceremony so that she is entitled to the highest applaud ` .
On the issue of actresses not getting their rights , Shahrukh said , ` I have worked with actresses like Hemaji , Madhuri , Sridevi , Juhi , Deepika , Anushka and other actresses ` .
All of them worked very hard .
Besides this female directors , producers , choreographers and many women have inspired me .
They are the backbone of our film industry .
But they are not able to get their appropriate right .
Respect not at the price of life : commenting on America giving the Delhi rape victim International Women of Courage Award Shahrukh said , it ` s good that they are respecting her are struggle .
But I want that one should not have to lose life to get this award .
Hopefully no one has to lose their life for this achievement .
Responding to that gruesome incident of Delhi , King Khan said , `` hopefully such inceident will not be repeated again `` .
He fought with utmost bravery and lost her life .
I think that we should respect women in all fields .
Deepika Padukone ` s Yeh Jawani Deewani is very close to collecting 100 crores at the box office .
This film of Karan Johar ` s production company Dharma Productions ` , made with a budget of 40 crores , collected twice its production cost in its first five days .
In India , it did the business of Rs . 87.19 crores till Tuesday which according to film trade pundits is likely to reach around Rs 100 crore till Wednesday .
The film trade is a little surprised also by the success of the film because where there is an average drop in a film ` s business on Monday , Yeh Jawaani Hai Deewani as compared to the first day -LRB- 19.75 million -RRB- did a very good business .
On Monday it grossed Rs 12.9 million from ticket sales , which is considered quite a good performance .
By doing Rs 11.83 crore business on Tuesday also , this film has given the indication that this film will remain on the top of big hits this year .
The comparison of its collection on the first day -LRB- Friday -RRB- and Monday is being made with Salman Khan ` s Dabang and Dabang 2 ` s box office collection .
Released on 3000 cinema screens in India , director Ayan Mukherjee ` s this film did better in multiplexes .
There are also reports of it doing good business overseas .
The reports of putting up the popular science fiction series Star Trek Into Darkness in some theaters of South Asian regions have been coming up .
Karan Johar ` s Production Student Of The Year , Agneepath , Shootout at Wadala , Jolly LLB , Kai po che , ABC are included in 2013 ` s those films which did well at the box office than their cost of production .
Today is World Radio Day .
This day is celebrated to celebrate the cheapest and a powerful medium of mass communication in the form of radio , enhance international cooperation among broadcasters , increasing public access to information and to encourage freedom of expression through the airwaves .
Radio is a multi-purpose communication medium , which is also useful in this era of advanced technology .
Its reach is till the poor living in remote areas , the disabled , instructors and the weaker sections of the society .
The radio still plays in 75 per cent of households in developing and there are nearly 44,000 radio stations worldwide .
Given these characteristics Radio Academy of Spain in 2010 requested the Executive Board of UNESCO in 2010 that a day should be declared as World Radio Day .
UNESCO ` s studied its feasibility and declared it in its 36th General Assembly on third November 2011 .
It was decided to celebrate it this day itself , because on February 13 itself the United Nations had established the United Nations radio .
In December 2012 the UN General Assembly supported the declaration of the World Radio Day and urged all member countries to commemorate the day .
All the regional and international broadcasting organizations in the world also supported it .
The World Radio Day was celebrated around the world last year for the first time .
The United Nations Postal Administration was about to issue a series of postage stamps also on the United Nations Radio on the occasion of World Radio Day .
Refining her skill within the Patiala singers for the last two decades , the talent of Indira Naik was revealed when a glimpse of her Sufi singing was seen on the stage .
Although this singer who presented different types of sufi compositions in the festival is not counted among the finest sufi singers of the country now , but she is definitely invited in every that festival where music is presented with full honesty .
Here also her charisma was seen and the audience thoroughly enjoyed compositions like Naina milai ke . .
It seemed as if there along with Sufi singing , the worship of the Lord was also going on .
Indira herself believes that the compositions that are there in Sufi , the poetry which is there , the Lord is prayed only with those .
When a person gets in some trouble , he takes refuge in God .
In that situation following sufism relieves him of his troubles .
Indira says , the world of music is amazing .
There are seven notes in it , but every day new thinking , new singing style and new people come to it and the dimension of music keeps changing .
Singing Sufi music is not difficult , but the selection of poetry is an important topic in it .
It means you only select that what the listener can understand .
Also the level of music should be high in it , then your presentation will be successful .
And when we heard people from Iran and Tunisia , then we felt how influential has sufi become in the music world and how it is bringing changes in people ` s lives .
The artists of Azerbaijan , Spain , Russia and India performed in the three-day Sufi Festival organized by ICCR .
In which the people of the Siddi Community of Gujarat sang Goma or Dhamaal in the old African style , on the other hand the Nirgun singers of Bihar gave the message of love and brotherhood through the couplets of Kabir .
Similarly when the artists of Bengal sang baul , then everyone present there cheered .
Indira says , `` Music brings people together and brings peace and harmony .
The event showed that we are all connected by the thread named music .
While the other countries presented their local culture and singing , their advanced music culture was also seen .
Indeed the magic of sufi was such these days that it felt for a moment that we have come to paradise .
Its true also because if we know celebrities like Bulle Shah , Baba Farid , Amir Khusro , there is a big role of sufi writings in it .
Hindi writer complains `` the publisher never give royalties `` .
The publisher of Hindi complains , ` the books don ` t get sold ` .
The generation who is used to living on credit or debit cards came out crying from the Hindi Book Fair hall .
No Hindi publisher had the convenience of shopping with the card .
The same was the problem with Hindi people in the World Book Fair - 2013 , the grand fair of books .
The publishers of English came laughing from the fair .
If you went to the the World Book Fair , then you must have observed .
The people who have been separated kept meeting each other in the hall .
Now when the people are meeting each other , then the books will obviously be left behind .
The scene was such that there were more hands in hands and less books .
Although the most crowd was in the hindi hall no . 13 .
A multitude of books on one hand , a crowd of people on the other .
But does really the books don ` t get sold despite of so many people , what kind of books are sold .
The question was answered at ` Gita Press Gorakhpur ` .
Seen from the distance - ` read and refer Gitapress books for self-development ` .
Its difficult to say how many people who came to this stall read this tagline .
But it is very easy to say by looking at the the kids , old and young people crowded here that even in today ` s hi-tech lifestyle people are still not able to leave the desire for self development .
Some one had thick books like Ramcharitmanas and Geeta in the hands and some were looking for small chalisas .
A boy of about 27-28 years in the crowd was seen speaking to the salesmen , `` Bother show me all those books written on cows `` .
It was learned after speaking that Mohnish who was raised up in Delhi and who got his MBA degree have a deep inclination towards spirituality .
He has a business of manufacturing and is associated with ISKCON .
It is also amazing to see that the young guy , searching for spiritual books in the hindi language stall speaks fluent English .
We all must have written an essay on cow in childhood , but after growing up only a few people get into fulfilling the line ` the cow is our mother ` .
Anyway the readers was absolutely free to look for any book according to their choice in this fair .
The case of freedom goes awry when the freedom of the reader ` s mind does not match with the business of the publisher .
The reader of the 21st century wants the payment to be taken with the card in this 21st World Book Fair , but probably no publisher of Hindi paid attention to this demand of the readers .
This reality came up at the stall of Vaani publications .
After buying books worth Rs . 2,000 when a gentleman arrived to get the bill , he had a debit card in his hands .
May be he didn ` t pay attention to the counter earlier , where the bills were being made with hands in the billing book attaching carbon paper under a paper .
Now the customer is not of the clerk category but of the officer category , so he immediately demands that brother you should have the facility to accept debit cards .
Now whether to call it the backwardness of the Hindi people or a little cunningness done to not keep the official records of the sale .
Associated with the New book publication , Atul Maheshwari says , `` Now we too need to get high - tech `` .
Harish Chandra of the Publishing Institute says , `` Hindi people come to roam around in the fair , not to purchase `` .
But the crowd at the stalls of Prabhat Prakashan and Rajkamal Publications was indicating that the crowd is buying the books .
But the bigger publishers of Hindi were seen saying that the fair was a disappointment only .
Such disappointment was in the previous World Book Fair too .
But no there was a lot of crowd in Penguin , Harper Collins .
The disappointment of sale was in Hindi .
Anyway there has been considerable controversy in the figures of sale of literare books in Hindi .
Authors feel that publishers do not give them proper royalty .
Publishers feel that the readers of literature in Hindi are decreasing constantly , and the poor reader eats burger instead of purchasing books in all this and returns from the book fair buying Ramcharitmanas .
After Raaz-3 , Bipasha Basu is to be seen in yet another horror movie .
The name of the film is ` Atma ` .
Bipasha Basu is in the main lead in Suparn Verma ` s this film .
On the occasion of movie poster release of the film Bipasha herself said , `` I ` ve become synonymous with fear ` .
Bipasha says , horror movie is also an art .
Filmmakers want to make such films and these films get audience also .
I do not mind working in such films .
Bipasha said that she liked the story and the script of Aatma a lot , then only she agreed to work in this film .
` Aatma ` is a scary story of a mother , who lives with her six year old daughter .
Although several producers and directors have made films taking the poor judicial system in India , but Subhash Kapoor has tried to do something different in this film .
The film is low budget , but still keeps the audience glued till the end .
It feels after watching the film that it was worth every penny .
See story on the common man is the exact fit .
Any common man considers facing the hassle easier instead of visiting the police and the court .
This is the reason why the people after watching the movie were seen expressing that its better to not get in the affairs of the police .
Jagdish Tyagi alias Jolly -LRB- Arshad Warsi -RRB- tries very hard to run his advocacy business in Meerut court , but the misfortune was that he loses in every case .
When the advocacy could not flourish in Meerut then on the suggestion of brother in law -LRB- Manoj Pahwa -RRB- the idea of start practicing in Delhi struck .
Jolly is so broke that once the police has to get the identification parade done of five terrorists in the court .
But a terrorist runs away before the parade , in such a situation Jolly wears a mask and joins the identification parade for one thousand .
Indeed , Jolly wants to become a famous lawyer like Tejendra Rajpal Singh -LRB- Boman Irani -RRB- .
Rajpal consistently wins lawsuits and to exonerate his client in a case of hit-and-run he makes a substantial amount .
Jolly gets that case reopened through PIL .
The case reopens and Rajapl ` s client keeps getting entangled in the legal battle .
The actors who succeeded even though the movie was low-budget , gave a realistic presentation to the story .
The Union Ministry of Tourism have prepared the draft of the proposal of single window clearance system -LRB- SWCS -RRB- .
Under this the Tourism Ministry will now be providing all the licences they get in India to the filmmakers who come to shoot from abroad .
Foreign filmmakers need 76 licenses to shoot in India .
In addition to this they have to deposit almost Rs 50 lakh as security .
The Oscar winning producer-director of Life of Pie who had come to shoot in India also faced a lot of problems .
The sources claim that the filmmaker of Life of Pie also had to visit the different Ministries in India multiple times for shooting .
It is recent incident .
A man named Shyam used to live in a village with his wife and two kids .
Shyam used to cut plants-trees and sell timber to the traders for his subsistence .
Similarly , Shyam used to kill animals and sell their skin also to the traders .
He used to sell it abroad on higher prices .
This went on for many years .
One day Shyam was going to work like every day .
That day only his friend Amit reached there .
Amit asked , Shyam where are you goi ?
Shyam said , I am going to my work , like everyday .
Amit said , Shyam are you going to cut plants-trees and kill anima ?
Shyam said loudly , yes what else .
Amit said , Shyam the trees-plants from which we get food , you are going to cut those on ?
Shyam said with an unhappy mood , I also do not want to cut plants-trees and I do not like killing animals as well .
I have to do this to feed my family .
Amit said , Shyam you can do some other work also to feed your family .
You should do farming .
We should be ashamed that we pollute Mother Earth , cut trees-plants .
If the vegetation dies , then nothing would be left .
Shyam started to understand now .
He gave up cutting trees-plants and killing animals .
Now he started farming industriously and started nurturing his family .
Kareena Kapoor instead of celebrating her first Holi with Saif Ali Khan after her marriage , will be celebrating with Imran Khan .
Kareena Kapoor told that we will not be together on Holi .
I will be celebrating the first Holi after marriage with Imraan .
Actually , whereas Kareena will be busy shooting for Karan Johar ` s film ` Gori tere pyaar mein ` , the shooting of Saif ` s Bullet Raja is happening in Lucknow .
Punit Malhotra is directing ` Gori tere pyaar mein ` .
Kareen and Imraan have worked together in the film ` Ek main aur ek tu ` before this .
Sonakshi Sinha is paired with Saif in ` Bullet Raja ` , being made under the direction of Tigmanshu Dhulia .
In response to a question whether the thinking of Bollywood actresses changes after marria ?
Fifty to sixty percent of the entertainment content gets prepared with this formula only and this content is around thirty to sixty percent of its total ingredients .
It is evident that the media is fully dependent on the industry and this dependence has made it reliant .
It is said that the film industry is also dependent on the media because it only needs publicity the most .
A few years ago , India TV did sting operations about casting couch in the industry .
After Shakti Kapoor and Aman Verma were showm in the sting , there was tremendous commotion and the film industry stood against the channel .
It is said that the channel had the sting footage of other people as well , which included some big personalities also , but the industry made such a pressure from all four sides that they were not shown .
Similarly , when Aaj Tak showed the photographs of Akshay Kumar having fun in London then he got angry and was so angry that he did not give interviews to this channel even after one and a half to two years .
Big stars and big banners films , no matter how bad they may be , are not given less than three stars .
Because annoying them is not in the interest of the institute .
Till a few years back , the biggies of the industry used to target the journalists , now they aim at the media institutions only .
