Telling Madhuri as his ` Dream girl ` Ranbir stated , ` when she comes on screen , as if light spreads out around ` .
On a question Ranbir said that now he does not want to play the same character , as he had played in Barfi directed by Anurag Basu .
The actor who started his acting career in Bollywood with Sanjay Leela Bansali ` s film Sanvariya said , I want to play new roles .
It is my wish that I would work in the films which are based on action , full of mystery and excitement and based on historical background .
On a question Ranbir said that he does not feel any pressure because of prestigious surname of Bollywood ` Kapoor ` associated with his name , but he feels a sense of responsibility because of it .
He said , Indian Cinema has completed its 100 years and my family is active in Bollywood for more than 80 years .
I have proud on my surname .
I wish that my future children , grandson and granddaughter to join the film industry .
Film actor Sanjay Dutta had to spend another night in Arthur road jail without sleeping .
Though there is a possibility to shift him in Yarvada Jail of Pune very soon .
Sanjay Dutta had surrendered himself before the TADA Court on Thursday and since then he is in Arthur Road jail .
After meeting with Sanjay Dutta at Saturday morning his Lawyer said that Sanjay Dutta is completely well .
In case of Mumbai bomb blast in 1993 other culprits also had surrendered before the TADA court on Thursday .
They too have been kept in jail .
Jail officers are silent on the matter of sending Sanjay Dutta to Yervada jail .
No one is being given any information that , when Sanjay Datta will be shifted to Yerwada Jail .
In beginning it was being said that Sanjay Dutta will be sent to Yerwada Jail on Friday night but Jail officers are silent about sending Sanjay Datta to Yerwada Jail .
For Sanjay Dutta till one month home made food will be supplied .
Then he will get only jail-food .
The especial thing is this , that this time he has to work as cook in jail for which he will be paid also Rs . 25 per day .
On shifting him to Yerwada Jail of Pune , still suspense is intact .
Who doesn ` t know actor Salman ` s generos y ?
See now after going jail of Sanjay Dutta , he has promised to Sanju ` s daughter Trishala to always be with .
Salman has promised to share the pain of his daughter in friendship with Sanjay Dutta .
Listening this from Salman ` s mouth , Sanjay Datta ` s family too felt very good .
According to the sources , when the news of the sentence of Sanjay ` s punishment had come , Salman was in America , then he had called up Trishala and said that whenever she needs he will be there .
Let me tell you that there is not good relation between Sanjay and his daughter Trishala .
In this situation they meet less .
Even Sanjay have not talked to Trishala since past one and a half month .
Salman and Sanjay had worked together in the films ` Sajan ` & ` Chal Mere Bhai ` .
Besides this , both actors have hosted jointly the fifth edition of ` Big Boss ` .
Let me tell you that imprisoned in the Mumbai ` s high security Arthur road jail ` s ` Egg-cell ` , actor Sanjay Datta is feeling suffocated in it and requested to the TADA court on Friday that he should be sent in another cell because he is not a terrorist .
Usually dreaded criminals and suspected terrorists are kept in the egg cell .
53 years old Dutta had surrendered in the TADA court on Thursday and he was sent to high security jail of middle Mumbai .
The culprit actor in the case of Mumbai bomb blast of 1993 will have to spend 42 months period in the jail .
Rizwan Merchant the Lawyer of Dutta has orally pleaded to court that he should be shifted from the ` egg cell ` of Arthur road central jail to another closet `` because actor is feeling suffocated because of insufficient air in this cell `` .
He said that usually terrorists and dreaded criminal are placed in the egg cell , hence , due to security reasons they could be kept separate from other prisoners .
Rizwan stated that Dutta is not convicted under TADA court and he is not a terrorist .
He is convicted under the Arms act and he should not be kept in egg-cell .
It is notable that actor Sanjay Dutta is kept in same barrack of Arthur road jail in which terrorist Kasab had been kept .
On Thursday , in Arthur road jail he spent the first night of the punishment .
According to the sources , Sanjay Dutt was restless all the night , he could not sleep well just kept looking to the walls of the jail only .
Special judge G A Sanap told to him that in this regard he should submit a written application that after hearing the arguments of the prosecution he could be able to give orders .
Marchent said that he would file the application later .
After asking about the activities of Sanjay Dutta in jail officer said , Thursday night he read some spiritual book which he brought with him .
He did workout too on Friday morning .
Though he looked restless and busy in himself .
Dutta had asked permission to TADA court to carry the copies of ` Bhagavadgita ` , ` Ramayana ` and ` Hanuman Chalisa ` with him .
The court had converted the six year imprisonment sentence which was announced by the special TADA court into five year imprisonment sentence this year in the March .
Tada court had sentenced him six years imprisonment in the year 2006 accusing him to keep the arms in an illegal way .
The guilty of the arms ` act actor Sanjay Dutt has been kept in the barrack of the Aurther Road , in which terreroist Kasab had been kept .
Though , Sanjay could be sent to the Yerawada jail of Pune .
But , the lawer of the Sanjay has protested against putting Sanjay in the barrack of the Kasab .
It is matter to think that terrorist Kasab had been hanged last year .
Sanjaya Dutta is planing to file the penitentiary petition in the court .
He will be taken today to the Yerwada jail of Pune .
After trying all the legal maneuvers and getting defeated in those Sanjay Dutta surrendered in the TADA court .
Although , Sanju Baba has to spend the imprisonment in the yerwada jail of Pune .
Outside the court the fans of Sanju Baba and media ` s people were gathered to get a glimpse .
But , police thought it better to get out Sanjay from the back door .
Sanjay Dutt was taken to Aurthur Road Jail in the huge security .
Sanjay was taken by the police van , on which curtain were there .
Generally it is done when any savage terrorist is moved in the police van .
Befor Sanjay went to the jail many stars reached to his home and gave him courage .
Many known stars of the Bollywood with Abhishek Bacchan , Ajay Devagan , David Dhawan reached to his house .
According to the information , Sanjay Dutta had brought a bag with him .
In the bag there were three books , toothbrush , paste , a trouser , one shirt and one T-shirt and his daily medicine were there .
It should be known that on the demand of Sanjay Dutt , Tada court has allowed to carry with him a mattress from home , pillow , Hanuman Chalisa , Ramayana , Bhagwad Geeta , toothpaste , shampoo , slippers , Kurta-payajama , incense stick to keep away mosquitoes and a fan .
Ali has shown his acting ability in the Bollywood films like ` Tere Bin Laden ` , ` Mere Brother Ki Dulhan ` and ` Chashme Baddur ` .
We are going to see the new look of Ali in the upcoming movie of Yash raj ` Kil Dil ` .
Ali is going to act in the new project of the Yashraj films ` Kil Dil ` .
Shad Ali who has directed the film ` Sathiya ` will be director of this film .
Beside him , in the movie Parineeti Chpara and Ranveer Singh will play the main character .
He said , it -LRB- Kill Dil -RRB- is an action film .
My character in this film is different than my previous films in every aspect .
You will see me in a new incarnation .
Jafar has worked yet in four hindi movies , in those he has played different characters .
` Tere Bin Laden ` was a sarcastical film .
` Mere Brother ki Dulhan ` and ` Landon Paris New York ` were a romantic comedy .
His fourth film ` Chashme Baddur ` was a comedy film .
From the loosing popularity of the pop music , Pakistani singer Ali Jafar is very sad .
To save it , Jafar wants to do something , but he also accepts this , that he can not bring the change in the situation alone .
In the film festival , which is running in the Cannes , everyone is restless to see the charisma of the beauties , but do you know that many other things are also running in this .
The 66th Cannes ` Film Festival , which started from 15th May will last till 26th May .
Let us tell you , behind this festival the business of sex racket has come in front .
We are not telling this thing , but the Hollywood Reporter Magazine has revealed this matter .
According to magazine , near to this Film Festival this game of sex is also played .
According to this magazine , during the festival the business of the sex racket remains on the peak .
In this , prostitutes earn about 40 thousand dollars in a night .
Around this film festival such things happen where the lens of the paparazzi photographers does not reach .
This time at Cannes festival India is a guest country .
In different categories , four Indian films have been selected .
It was the day of first September 1939 when the first Cannes festival started .
In a casino of the city it was organized .
In the screening some fancies and some foreign films were supposed to show .
In that , The Wizard of Oz was also included .
But this festival had to stop in the initial 48 hours due to starting of the second world war .
This festival was organized again in September 1946 .
During that period , Brief Encounter of the British Director David Lean had been shown also .
In Cannes , generally , new director also gets proper respect .
Many famous directors like George Luckas , Ken Lokh , Steven Sodarberge , Kwentin Terintino have presented their first film here .
The Friday released movie ` Aurangzeb ` is full with murder , sacrifice and glamour .
In total it may be said that it is a value for money and worth seeing film .
In Aurangzed , Arjun Kapoor , Rishi Kapoor , Sasha Aga the daughter of Pakistani actress Samlma Aga , the famous actor of Malyalam films Prithviraj Sukumaran , Amrita Singh , Sikandar Kher and also Shrava Bhashkar have the lead role .
In the film Arjun Kapoor will be seen in the double role .
Sasha Aaga daughter of Salma Aaga is starting her career through this film , which is made in the background of the Haryana and NCR .
Salma Aaga who became famous through Nikah had just one wish that somehow her daughter Sasha should be launched in the Hindi films .
Eventually her wish fulfilled .
Sasha is not the other , is Zara Aaga .
Some time ago , her one SMS with Ruslaan Mumtaaz had come in the limelight .
To get rid from that defame , Salma Aaga has changed the name of her daughter from Zara to Sasha .
This the story of the conflict which emerges due to the opposite thought of two persons from a family .
The opinion of a person is , that for the family , we should sacrifice our dreams , another has belief that for dreams own people should be sacrificed , hence at any cost he has to get the success .
In first sight , Aurangzeb also looks like the story of the identical twins .
But , there is the matter to pay attention that Aurangzeb is the high speed crime drama between police-criminal .
Such dramas are not the ordinary .
According to the story of the Aurangzeb also , to catch the godfather of the crime world in the city , police doesn ` t have enough proof .
Criminal is a trustworthy operative , who doesn ` t leave proof after the crime .
One day police gets his identical .
He kidnapped the confidant of the godfather and plant his identical at his place , thus proof can be collected against the godfather .
Aurangzeb , which has been used in making suspense is not a comedy film .
In the crime films , the faces of these identical changes , activity changes .
Atul Sabharwal , who stepped in the field of film direction from ` Aurangzeb ` is impressed by the work of actor Arjun Kapoor that he has planned to work with him in his second film also .
Famous actor Rishi Kapoor will be seen in the character of the Villain again in the film of Yashraj Films ` Aurangzeb ` .
Before this , Rishi Kapoor has played the role of villain in the film of the film producer Karan Johar ` Agnipath ` .
In ` Agnipath ` Rishi had played the character of Rauf lala , who sits with Kurta-payajama , cap and Kajal in his eyes .
Today is the birthday of Madhuri Dixit , a beauty queen who reigned over the hearts for decades and she has completed the 46 years of the life .
In the decade of 80 and 90 , such a magic of Madhuri of fabulous dancing and natural acting of Madhuri had overcasted that Madhuri had become the heartbeat of the whole country .
On 15 May 1967 , in a Marathi family of Mumbai , Madhuri Dixit was born .
The beloved of the father Shankar Dixit and mother Snehlata Dixit , Madhuri had wished to be a doctor since childhood and perhaps it has been a reason that Madhuri selected Shriram Nene as her life partner , who is a doctor by profession .
After studying from the Divine Child High School , Madhuri Dixit has completed her graduation degree from the University of Mumbai .
Madhuri has done the many super hit films like Beta , Dil , Sajan , Hum Apke Hain Kaun , Anjam , Tejab , Pukar .
Madhuri Dixit was nominated many times for the Filmfare Award for her great acting and three times she was honored by the Filmfare Award -LRB- best actress -RRB- also .
For the film `` Devdas `` she got the award of the best supporting actress .
In the year 2008 , Madhuri Dixit was honored by the Padmashree Award also .
Now in her upcoming films ` Dedh Ishquiya ` and ` Gulab Gang ` is included .
` Dedh Ishquiya ` of Vishal Bhardwaj is the next edition of Vidya Balan ` film ` Ishquiya ` which came in 2010 .
In the ` Gulab Gang ` of Anubhav Sinha , she will be seen in the role of the gangster .
Though , at the Indian actress on whom everyone ` s eyes are fixed is Vidya Balan , who has been made the member of the Cannes Film Jury .
Actress Sonam Kapoor is very exited about to participate in the 66th Cannes Film festival .
This film festival will go from 15th to 26th May .
During this , Amitabh Bacchan and Aishwarya Rai will be present there .
Sonam has participated before this also .
Actress Sonal Chauhan knows it very well that just being bold and beautiful someone could not stay in the Bollywood .
Thus , this girl who is going to be 28 years old wants luck from her fans on the occasion of her birthday , hence she could do good and hit films .
Here , the successful is one who has work and who does not have work this industry does not remember him .
Today is the birthday of Sonal and it is the hope , if she would be asking something from God on her birthday then it will be just luck , with the help of that her carrier might go forward .
Sonal had been born on 16th May , 1987 in Bulandshahar , Uttar Pradesh .
Father of Sonal , who comes from the famous royal Chouhan Rajput clan of Uttar Pradesh is Inspector in the police .
After completing her education from Gargi College of Delhi , Sonal started to concentrate toward modelling .
In the year 2005 , just after winning the award of Miss World Turism itself , many assignments of modelling started to come to Sonal Chauchan .
Sonal was the first Indian who had been honored by the Miss World Tourism Award .
After this she became famous .
She also did advertisements for many products like Ponds , Nokia , Hero Honda .
Though there is the big difference in modelling and acting , Sonal understands that very well .
This is the reason that having a beautiful face and delicacy also she did get very less opportunity to work in the films .
At first she had been seen in the album of Himesh Reshamiya `` Aap ka Surur `` .
After this , in the year 2008 , Kunal Deshmukh signed her for his film Jannat .
The film was hit at the box-office and audience liked the pair of Sonal and Imran Hashmi .
But the success of the first film became unable to get Sonal more films , due to that reason she had to work in the Kannada Films .
Though , recently her film with Neel Nitin Mukesh 3G did not show any wonder at the Box-office .
It is the saying of the actress Sonal Chauhan that to look fit-active she does not believe to take the balanced diet and she eats every thing .
Wish , this year will be very good for Sonal Chauhan and she will get the opportunity to work in the new films .
Sonal said , `` I always have been saying that in the film industry the best person is Saif Ali Khan , with whom I could marry , but there is someone else right over him now .
Sonal feels that it is not the age of her to be getting married .
Right now , just have to quest the right person .
Till now you have seen Babli Badmash , Priyanka Chopra acting and dancing on screen but now about Priyanka Chopra it could be read in the books also .
In a chapter on the CBSE board ` s environmental science children will be taught about the life stories of Priyanka Chopra .
Actually , in the books of Mumbai ` s Spring Dells School one whole chapter would be about Priyanka Chopra and her films .
Spring Dells is a prestigious organization .
Which has branches in the abroad also and it is recognized by CBSE .
It is being said that she has been included in the syllabus due to having army background also .
In the book the name of the chapter has been given Roving Families , Shifting Homes .
This will be a new achievement for Priyanka Chopra because till now no any Bollywood celebrity has been included in the course .
In this book Priyanka Chopra ` s winning pictures of Miss World Award will be also there .
Simultaneously , with Priyanka her family picture will be also there .
Priyanka had started her career in Bollywood from the film ` Andaj ` .
She had impressed everyone by her acting in the recently came movie Barfi .
Background singer who is spreading the magic of his spiritual voice from more than three decades was honored by National Lata Mangeshkar Award in a grand celebration in the year 2011-12 .
In the field of the light music , for his incomparable contribution Hariharan was honored by this prestigious embellishment of the Madhya Pradesh Government in the yearly celebration at the native place of ` Suron Ki Mallika ` .
State ` s Public Relation and Culture minister Lakshmikant Sharma gave him in recognition two lakh rupees and commendation certificate .
After getting the National Lata Mangeshkar Award , overwhelmed 58 years background singer said , I feel myself very lucky that I was given the award which is established in the name of Latajee .
I want to say thanks to the Madhya Pradesh Government that he thought me worthy of this honor .
Hariharan is the 28th artist , who was honored by the National Lata Mangeshkar Embellishment .
This honor had been established in the year 1984 .
Before Hariharan from this embellishment 27 music celebrities with Naushad , Kishor Kumar and Asha Bhonsle have been awarded .
In the field of the light music to encourage the artistic grandeur , Every year the Madhya Pradesh Government provides National Lata Mangeshkar Embellishment .
This honor is given alternately in the field of the background singing and music direction .
The beauty queen Aishwarya Rai Bachchan was doing wonders in black gown on the red carpet of the Cannes Film Festival .
39 years old actress who participated in the festival 11th times had kept her hair untie and wore a little jwellery .
Although , Aishwarya who came with her 18 months old daughter to participate in this festival , kept her daughter away from the sight of the camera .
The Cannes Film Festival , is celebrating this time the hundred years of Indian Cinema .
Aishwarya Rai Bachchan is also an important part of the Bollywood .
On the Red Carpet Aishwarya Rai was seen in the sari designed by Abu Jani and Sandeep Khosla .
Instead of the western clothes Aishwarya Rai Participated with a black colored beautiful sari designed by Sabyasachi on the occasion of the completion of the 100 years of Indian Cinema .
During the display of the Hindi cinema ` Bombay Talkies ` Aishwarya had tied her hair and had worn the gold jewelry with embroidered sari .
Last year Aish had looked quite fat in the Cannes , but this time she has reduced so much weight of her .
In the black gown Aish was looking very beautiful .
The name of the blind is Nayansukh , you must have heard this proverb .
It has this meaning , having name against the character .
It could be identified till some extent with the serials which are displayed on different channels and newly making films .
The difference is just this that here against the name the story is being presented to the audiences .
Till few episodes , some serials seems to make their name worthy , but after some times their process to wondering is started .
As , for example , during the initial stage of the serial Balika Vadhu which is being shown on the color channel , audiences were made aware of the side effects of the child marriage .
But whatever is being shown presently , from that , this name Balika Vadhu does not seem relevant from anywhere .
Who got into child marriage , that boy disobeying his child marriage , married somewhere else and Balika Vadhu Remained alone means Anandi , then it is being talked about coming someone else in her life .
Till there is no such clarification of this story has been done that it is in favor or against of the child marriage .
Yes , from this the moral values and traditions of the society were blown apart certainly .
But the name of the few serials seems awkward with being irrelevant , which do not have a whit of connection with the story .
Rang Badalti Odhani , Diya Aur Bati Hum , now , in this , to which romantic couple ` s character audience would identify as Diya and Bati .
Because the union of lamp and wick can produce light when there is the intermediation of the oil or ghee in that .
The name of some serials are made by stealing and twisting the lines of the filmy songs .
The producer - director of the serials which are being started as mushroom finish off their duty by manipulating some how .
Their main motivation remains just to collect more money anyhow .
Just , any how the story would start to be displayed on the channel , after that they play in silver .
Now , in serials even the facts to increase the superstition are served .
Such characters with the faces of ghost-spirit are shown that if children would see , then will not be without becoming scared .
Today , new making movies are also not untouched by it .
Here also , the unmatched union of the name of the films and the story would be seen .
See the film of the Saif Ali Khan Love Aaj Kal , if according to the name of the film it would be thought then the outline of the earlier love and modern love will be understood .
But after watching the film not even yesterday ` s love could be understood and not also today ` s love .
It also does not become clear in the recently released film of the Prakash Jha ` Arakshan ` that the film is in favor or against the reservation .
Initially the reservation policy was said right , but later it was criticized badly .
Like this , in the newly released film Ra . One , audiences did not understand the right meaning of the Ra . and One .
Over the general people it became Rawan instead of Ra . One .
Despite of all these also , films and serial become superheated , then behind this the strategic manoeuvers of makers work .
While making the film itself , it is advertised rigorously on the huge hoardings .
Such scenes are printed on the poster , after looking those the curiosity to watch the movie increases and simultaneously on TV attractive promos are displayed .
To make the movie hit , the biggest tool which is adopted by the filmmakers is the gimmick to scandalize the film .
If anyhow film would be scandalized and would reach to the court then nobody could stop it to become a hit .
Because in such situation the curiosities of the audiences reach to its extreme .
How much work Yashpal Sharma has done , did not get that much credit .
With Gangajal movie , Prakash Jha comebacks .
Till when Yashpal Sharma does not come in the film , till then it seems like that the film is trying to hold the Bihar .
Just after coming of Yashpal Sharma , Bihar presents .
In the whole film only Yashpal Sharma shows a Bihari character naturally and attention of any journalist does not go that Gangajal film runs completely on the shoulder of Yashpal Sharma .
Imagine separating Yashpal Sharma from those characters and putting any actor in that place , both of the films will be seen biting the dust .
Can you forget the character of yashpal Sharma in La n ?
But , don ` t know why , only cheap things are viewed to media , especially TV news media .
In the acting power of Yashpal Sharma , the power of Balraj Sahani , Ashok Kumar , Motilal is seen to me .
Yashpal Sharma with the power of his naturalness is completely different from his contemporaries .
Ashok Kumar says that I don ` t act , it happens .
Only a poetic heart actor can say this .
And Yashpal Sharma is also like this - poet of acting .
Yashpal Sharma is blessed in getting into any character naturally and power to paint in his own color .
It becomes the responsibilty of the Yashpal Sharma that he should play the positive characters also .
Especially , after portraying the negative character of the Bihar with this truth , he should also paint the there ` s positive characters in his own color .
In the coming time , we wish to see him in various characters .
The known filmmaker of the Bollywood , Vinay Sinha is going to make the sequel of his super hit film ` Andaj Apana Apana ` .
It is said that for the direction of the film he has contacted Rajkumar Santoshi .
The actors in this film have not been selected .
Possibly , ` Andaj Apana Apana ` will be made by taking new artists .
It is notable that in the year 1994 produced by Vinay Sinha and directed by Rajkumar Santoshi in the film ` Andaj Apana Apana ` , Amir Khan and Salman Khan from their comedy acts enthralled the audiences .
In ` Andaj Apana Apana ` Karishma Kapoor , Raveena Tandan , Paresh Raval and Shakti Kapoor had important roles .
One of the most beautiful actresses of the Hindi cinema , Vaheeda Rahman presented an example of her acting in the dream world of the films .
Vaheeda Rahaman is the name of the talent , with whom every actor of that time wanted to work .
On the occasion of the birthday of the actress Vaheeda Rehaman , it is saying of Vaheeda , today change has come in the film world .
Now , in the films , songs are named item number , at our time songs were the part of the story .
People still like to hum the songs of her films .
Vaheeda Rahman was born on 14th May , 1936 in the Haidrabad .
Due to the reason her father was an IAS officials , Vaheeda Rehman lived in the different places in India with her family .
In the childhood she had wish to be a doctor , but in her fate it had written to reign over Bollywood .
The wish of Vaheeda was to be a doctor , but circumstances brought her into the glittering world of the films .
The film career of the Vaheeda Rahman , who was an expert in the Bharat Natyam started from Telugu films .
After that Gurudutta did many films with Vaheeda Rahman , among those Pyasa has remained most popular .
From the film Pyasa itself , the unsuccessful love story of Guru Dutta and vaheeda Rahman started .
The unsuccessful love story of the film Kagaj ke Phool -LRB- 1959 -RRB- acted by Gurudutta and Vaheeda Rahaman was based on their life .
Although , after some time Guru Dutta and Vaheeda seperated .
On 10 October , 1964 , allegedly Guru Dutta had suicided , after that Vaheeda remained alone .
Even though , she did not parted with career and in 1965 he got the Filmfare Award for Guide .
In Vidya Balan glimpse of her is seen to Vaheeda Rahman who played memorable role in ` Guide ` and ` Teesari Kasam ` .
It is saying of Vaheeda that I used to select different kinds of movies .
About not doing any film after doing the Rakesh Omprakesh Mehra ` s ` Delhi 6 ` , she said that I want the excited role .
My role should be dedicated to the film , not just that I should be in that .
Which should be tough role , let it be the character of the old , but should be dedicated .
I don ` t want to do this just to work in the film .
In the year 1974 , Kamlajeet , who worked with her proposed for marriage to her and Vaheeda Rahman accepted that happily and was bounded in the tie of the marriage .
The year 2000 came into her life as a shock when her husband died unexpectedly .
Bollywood film Ankur Arora Murder Case is a clinical thriller film directed by Suhail and written by Vikram Bhatt .
In the Ankur Arora film beside Paoli , K . K. Menon , Tiska Chopra and Arjun Mathur have played the important roles .
The film is going to release in coming 14th June .
The actress of the Bangla film , Paoli Dam says that her character in the upcoming film of Vikram Bhatt ` Ankur Arora Murder Case ` identifies to her real life .
The story of the film is based on the real event of the death of a boy due to the recklessness of the doctor .
Paoli has played the role of an advocate in the film .
Paoli said in an interview , in the film my role is of an advocate who lives simply .
The first Hindi film of Paoli was ` Hate Story ` .
She says that ` Ankur Arora ` is a different kind of story and very distinct from her first film .
Born in a Bengali family , Paoli Dam spent her childhood in Calcutta .
During the time of the collage itself , Pauli started to work in the theater .
Then , she got the first break in the serial of the Bengali television ` Tithir-Atithi ` and from there her acting career started .
From her film ` Kalbela ` Pauli made her recognition in the industry .
In 2012 she got the offer of Vikram Bhatt ` s movie ` Hate Story ` , through that Paoli did her banging entry in the Bollywood .
The film did the good business at the box-office and with that , Paoli got better recognition in the Bollywood .
It is the saying of the Ruslaan Mumtaz , the main actor of the film ` I love You ` that this film is the touching love story of two students .
The film will make audience helpless to think .
The film is based on the impact of the life of two people after SMS event .
Ruslaan said in a program that , I Don ` t Love You is basically a love story based on collage .
We all know that SMSes are made .
But , how everyone watches it , this has been shown in the film .
The story of a collage student who changes after an SMS scandal is in this film .
The subject of the film is quite unique and there is a hope that film will stand upon the liking of the audiences .
The film also tells the story of the impact of the media over modern youth .
After this Jackson to pay his debt had started to take the loan against his property .
For the income , he also bought the right of the Bettel ` s songs of 40 Crore 50 Lakh and also had done an agreement with the Sony Publishing Company .
It is the saying of the Michael Jackson ` s property caretaker , John Branca that Michael is the most sold artist on I Human .
After his death till now , his five crore albums have been sold .
According to the will of Jackson , 20 percent part of his property for the donation , 40 percent for his children and the rest 40 percent will be received by his mother in the whole life .
After the death of the Jackson from the auction of his things and selling of his Album from 2009 Jackson State has income of 60 Crore dollars .
Till when Michael was alive , debt of 50 Crore was over him .
Between the years 1980-1990 , Jackson had done the income of more than 10 Crore dollars even .
But in 1993 he had been accused of exploitation after that he reduced his show quite a bit .
Big brands had shunned him .
Alive elephant is of a lakh and died elephant is of one and fifteen lakh .
This dictum is proven correct completely over the late controversial pop singer , Michael Jackson .
39 years old actress who came here to participate in Cannes Film Festival , has increased her stay to participate in the MRF program for the AIDS investigation .
Aishwarya will participate in an auction , which is the part of this program .
The obtained money from this auction will be used in the AIDS research .
Tahiliyani is an Indian designer .
Tahiliyani is an only Indian designer which will present his clothes in the gold themed fashion show .
The Friday released film Ishq in Paris is a romantic comedy , which is inspired by the real life of Priety Zinta .
The party said during the publicity of the film here that ` Ishq in Paris ` is not completely inspired by her life , but from the some part of her life this movie is certainly inspired .
She said that in this film not just mine , but some part of the life of the director Prem Raj will be sighted also .
In the film has become half Indian and half French girl , who fell in love with a boy in the world ` s dearer city Paris .
She said , we have taken something from everyone ` s life because it seems to me that art is a mirror of the life .
Ishq in Paris is a film full of comedy , which will be liked by audiences .
With Preity new comer Rehman Malik also has lots of hopes with this movie .
Actress Preity Zinta is doing her comeback with the film `` Ishq in Paris `` which was stuck since quite long time .
She accepts that to make this film was a big challenge for her because she had to perform many characters at a time .
On asking this that why the film was shot in the Paris , Preity said , I did the shooting in New York , Australia , London , Switzerland , Italy and South Africa but never had done in the Paris , that ` s why .
Priety said , the shooting of this movie was not easy , it was a risk .
But it was a fantastic experience because I was attached to it from initially .
In the eight months , I and Prem wrote the original screenplay , which is not based on any Hollywood film or the story which is taken from any film .
In the film of Priety , Sallu has done an item song also , because the stars of the Salman is over the top level these days .
After giving the continuous hit series of the film , this item number has been tried on Salman and perhaps due to this intention itself Priety has asked for the support of Salman .
Priety Zinta wants to make her feet strong again in the Bollywood .
In the hurry-scurry of the IPL and and Nes Wadia , the film career of Priety has been faded .
38 years old actress had been seen in the year 2009 in the film acted by Salman Khan `` Mai And Mrs . Khurana `` .
According to the connoisseur , Priety did not have any film , thus she gambled to do a production of her own .
Bollywood actor Rishi Kapoor and his son Ranbeer Kapoor can be seen together recently in the remake of the film ` Awara ` .
In the film the role of Prithwiraj Kapoor could be done by Rishi Kapoor and and role of the Raj Kapoor by Ranbeer Kapoor .
Not just this , through the remake of the ` Awara ` , the possibility of new beginning of the producing company of the Kapoor clan ` R . K. Films ` is being hinted .
Rishi Kapoor will be seen very soon with his wife Neetu and son Ranbeer in the film of Abhinav Kashyap ` s ` Besharam ` .
He said disclosing his plan with Ranbeer , while working in this new film ` Besharam ` it will be known that how is the chemistry of the acting betwen us .
After that we are going to do something big .
Planning to make the remake of the film ` Awara ` is in our mind and with the concern of everybody this film will be made under the banner of ` R . K. Films ` .
It is worth pondering that the first showman Raj Kapoor at the age of 24 years in the year 1948 by establishing the R . K. Films has made many memorable films like Awara , Shri 420 , Boot Polish , Jagte Raho , Jis Desh me Ganga Bahti Hai , Sangam , Mera Naam Jokar .
In the year 1988 , after the death of Rajkapoor his son Randheer Kapoor under the R K Banner produced Heena , Rajeev Kapoor has produced Prem Granth and Rishi Kapoor has produced Aa Aab Laut Chale kind of films .
Aa Aab Laut Chale presented in 1998 is the last film of this prestigious banner .
Simultaneously , Rishi Kapoor also cleared this that he will not direct the remake film ` Awara ` .
He said , thanks , I do not want to come in the field of the direction at all .
I am comfortable and happy just as an actor .
I just want to act and want to live peacefully .
Despite acting I do not want to do anything else .
For the acting in the film ` Aurangzeb ` I am getting praises , I don ` t want happiness more than this .
In the exhibited film Awara in 1951 , Prithvi Raj Kapoor , Raj Kapoor , Nargis K . N. Singh had played the main role .
Not just this , these father-son are also racing on the box-office .
The news is that the number of the movies of Rishi Kapoor which are going to be released this year are more than the film of Ranbeer Kapoor .
This year seven films of Rishi Kapoor are releasing among those two films ` Chashme Baddur ` and Aurangjeb have been released .
Whereas , Ranbeer Kapoor will be seen in ` Besharam ` beside ` Ye Jawani Hai Deewani ` which is being released in May .
Some more films of him are projected also , but on those work has not been started yet .
For now , you can see the chemistry of the father Rishi Kapoor and Son Ranbeer Kapoor in the film ` Besharam ` which is being released in October of this year .
Today , on the screen of the Indian Cinema , mother does not have that existence , which used to have of Sulochana , Leela Chitnis , Nirupa Roy , Leela Mishra and Reema Lagu .
Till some extent , Phareeda Jalal maintained that position .
Meanwhile , in the share of Hema , Vaheeda Rahman , Rakhi also the good role of the mother is seen .
But it seems that the days of the mother passed away .
There were days when the films , mother used to be the voice .
Shashi Kapoor by saying this , I have mother , gave it a form of the dictum .
Earlier , songs used to be sung for them .
Whatever role of the mother was there in ` Tare Jameen Par ` but the song written by Prasoon Joshi ` Mai kabhi batalata nahi , par andhere se darta hu mai ma . ` had brought tears in the eyes of every audience .
But , meaning is this that the mother who had been given this much importance , that mother is being vanished from the screen of the Hindi cinema .
The mother used to be the center of the family , but from the films when the family started to be vanished then who would be there to ask mot r ?
Today , there are no joint family and no such small family where mother is waiting for her children standing near the gate .
Now , mothers have come in TV serials .
But , some troubles are coming for people to accept that mother .
Either , that mother is being shown as a villain in the form of the shrewish , dictator mother-in-law or such girls are being made mother whose age is about 25-30 years .
From that mother the feeling of mother does not come .
Secondly , she is published as addressing sexy , hot mother .
Now what will the picture or image of that mother be for d ?
Thus , this was being hoped that at least Bhojapuri cinema will fullfill the lack of the mother of the Hindi cinema .
When in Bhojapuri , the story of the old Hindi films can be repeated , then why is mother being a d ?
Though , certainly mother is here , but her presence is there just for the sake of the name .
No one is ready to think over this question that what is the meaning of the vanishing of mother from Bhojap i ?
In today ` s period also many actresses are playing the role of the mother but how strong that character should be , that is not being seen .
In those artists the name of Maya Yadav , Pushpa Verma , Mehanaz , Nandini Mishra , Suneeta Sharma , Neelima Singh , etc . is important .
On them , Bhojapuri industry should also feel proud .
It is the saying of Maya Yadav that in the story , though the mother is wriggling but even though the camera moves over the stars .
The Hindi cinema is quitting the things , by holding those Bhojapuri had established its position .
But now Bhojapuri is also ignoring those things .
On Friday , Information and Broadcasting Minister Manish Tiwari awarded the senior actor of the Bollywood , Pran with the prestigious Dadasaheb Phalke award , going at his home .
Due to not being well , 93 years old Pran could not go to the 60th National Film Award ceremony which was organised last week in Delhi .
Perhaps this is the first occasion when any actor has been give Phalke Award at his home .
Actor Pran who gave live to the characters of villain in the films like ` Milan ` , ` Madhumati ` , ` Kahmir Ki Kali ` , was given a ` golden lotus ` certificate , 10 lakh rupees cash and a shawl under this award .
Tiwari gave this award to Pran , who wore Kurta-Payajama after going at his home in Pali Hill of Bandra .
Pran was on the wheelchair .
With him , his daughter Pinky and son Sunil were there .
Tiwari said , ` his health is not well , hence , to give this award after going to him was our responsibility .
I acknowledge everyone .
After asking this that was Pran given this award late , Tiwari said , for the award a process has to be followed .
Board of juries decides that when award should be given .
The children of Pran showed happiness on this prestigious award , which was given to the Pran .
Pinky said , he -LRB- Pran -RRB- is happy .
We are also happy from this thing that he -LRB- minister -RRB- came here to give this award .
We organised a party and enjoyed it .
For some time the health of older actor is not well .
Sunil said , ` he is better than before ` .
On asking this , that was Pran given this award late , he said , ` we do not want to go into this ` .
Almost in the career of six decades Pran has worked in more than 350 films .
The films like ` Milan ` , ` Madhumati ` , ` Kashmir Ki kali ` and ` Upakar ` are laced with his memorable act .
On screen the magic of his villain ` s image overcasted like this that when his popularity was on top then people stopped to keep their children ` s name ` Pran ` .
The kingdom of Pran remained on screen from 1969 to 1982 .
Tiwari has given this honor after going to his apartment .
According to a survey which was done in England the most liked film of the Hindi Cinema has been selected to the film DDLJ of the Raj-Simran .
The biggest paper view -LRB- PPV -RRB- service of the England , Sonana , for the Indian films , had done a voting , in that fans selected the DDLJ the most liked film .
This successful romantic film of 1995 , which was made in the direction of Aditya Chopara the son of Yash Chopara , got 47 % vote .
In this online voting , DDLJ has left behind the big films like Raj Kapoor ` s ` Awara ` , Mahboob Khan ` s ` Mother India ` and Ramesh Sippi ` s ` Sholay ` .
This is worth pondering that on the occasion of completion of 100 years of Hindi Cinema , the opinion had been asked from movie lovers through e-mail and movie portals on the Facebook and Twitter kinds of social networking websites .
After ending up of voting , ` Dilwale Dulhaniya Le Jayenge ` beside India , which was shot in the England and the beautiful locations in Switzerland , was announced as an evergreen film .
The CMO of Sonana , Saziya Nizam said that looking at popularity of ` DDLJ ` , she did not get surprised of the selection of this film as ` most liked film ` .
Actually , this film had been running till 900 weeks in the Mumbai ` s Maratha Mandir Theater .
Thus , this film has created the history to show for the longest time in any theater in the history of Indian Cinema .
At the award ceremony of the year 1996 , the film DDLJ , with getting the 10 Filmfare awards , had got the national award also .
As a director , this debut film of Aditya corporal had been released on 20 October 1995 .
Beside Abhay and Sonam , in this movie , actor and singer Dhanush is also working , who became famous with ` Kolaveri D ` .
This is his first Bollywood film .
The director who became famous from ` Tanu Weds Manu ` said that he wants such actors in the film who will make live the character of the general public and for this Sonam and Dhanush looked right to me .
The shooting of Ray ` s ` Tanu Weds Manu ` had been in Kanpur and Ranjhana has been shot in Varanasi .
Ray said , the film is an emotional love story .
Like ` Tanu Weds Manu ` the characters of Ranjhana will also take you to Delhi , Punjab and Chennai .
A. R . Rahman has given the music of this film , which has been produced by Eros International .
Madhuri Dixit , who fascinated from her dance on the song ` Maar Daala ` in the film ` Devada ` released in the year 2002 will present her dance in the song ` Aapke Karar Me ` written by Vishal Bhardwaj .
Vishal Bhardwaj is the director of this film also .
Producer Ketan Maru said in a current statement , song is ready and we will shoot it after the completion of the film shooting .
About this I can not reveal much , but I would like to say that this would be a very extensive song which will be shot on a big set .
In this song Madhuri will give her presentation with Pandit Birju Maharaj .
Birju Maharaj , who got the National Award recently for the choreography in the film ` Vishwarupam ` , said , after ` Maar Daala ` once again I am working with Madhuri in a song in ` Dedh Ishquiya ` .
She is a great dancer and it ` s a pleasure to work with her .
Before this also , Madhuri has made people fans of her from many songs .
In the film ` Sailab ` Madhuri did a hot dance .
Due to the song ` Dhak-Dhak Karne Laga ` Madhuri is known as the Dhak-Dhak girl .
In this song the chemistry of Anil Kapoor and Madhuri is a thing to see .
Bollywood actress , Bipasha Basu in her new film ` Creecher ` is going to be seen as a player and for this she has to loss her weight .
According to the news , for the film of Bikram Bhatt to get the body like players Bipasha has also bought gymnastic training machine , ` TRX Rip ` .
In these days ` TRX Rip ` is being very popular in Singapore . .
Bipasha has hope that this machine will help her to get the toned body .
Bipasha says that for the character of the film , there will be the need to do regular exercise for her because she has to look like a player .
Bipasha said in a statement , I saw the use of the TRX Rip machine in Singapore and I bought this machine .
In the June the shooting of my film ` Creecher ` is starting and till then I will have to in a complete fit body .
For the film ` Atma ` I had increased a bit of weight and now I need to reduce the weight .
The counting of Bipasha is among the actresses who have best figure .
Recently , she has launched her fitness video also .
With figure Bipasha is known also for her style statement .
Bipasha Basu has given many good films in her career .
This film is the story of two friends , Kunal Khemu and Veer Das who go to visit Goa with another friend .
In the film , Saif has played the character of the Russian Mafia zombie hunter .
Saif Ali Khan will be seen in this film in a complete new look .
In the film he has taken the blond look , has tattooed over body and learned Russian language also .
Puja Gupta will be also seen in the film with Kunal Khemu , veer Das , Anand Tiwari .
This film of the producer Saif Ali Khan is going to be released on 10th May in theaters .
Beside two films ` Bhag Milkha Bhag ` and remake of the ` Khoobsurat ` , Sonam is working in a movie of the ` Yash Raj Films ` , name of that has not been decided yet .
In the remake of the ` Khubsurat ` , Sonam has played the character of Rekha who has acted in 1980 in the hit film of Rishikesh Mukharjee .
Sonam said , I am a fan of Rekha .
I am influenced by her .
I have met Rekha Jee before .
Our film is not motivated by the original film .
Its theme is motivated , but story , the idea is completely different .
the energy she -LRB- Rekha -RRB- put in the film , we are trying to get that energy .
Sonam said that this movie does not have any relation with the last movie .
Sonam is quite excited about her next film ` Bhag Milkha Bhag ` , where she has acted with film actor Farhan Akhtar .
The film , which was made on the story of Pan Singh Tomar , who became goon from athlete was honored with the National Award of the best story .
For the lively acting in this film Irphan Khan got the best actor award .
President Pranab Mukharjee gave the 60th National Film Awards , in that , there was predominance of Malyalam films remained .
The famous villain and character actor Pran of the past era was given the Dada Saheb Falke Award .
Due to not having a good health , 93 years old Pran , who got recently leave from the hospital , could not come to take the award .
On this occasion , message from his family was shown on the big screen which is fixed in the Science Building .
The first film of the India ` Raja Harishchandra ` had been released 100 years ago , on today ` s day itself .
On the occasion of the 100th anniversary of the Indian Cinema , Mukharjee launched 50 special post ticket also .
On this occasion , Information and Broabcast Minister Manish Tiwari and Information Technology and Communication Minister Kapil Sibbal were also present there .
As the prize the director of Pan Singh Tomar , Tigmanshu Dhuliya was given Golden Lotus and two and a half lakh rupees .
With Irfan , actor Vikram Gokhale was given the award of the best actor for the Marathi film ` Anumati ` .
There , Usha Jadhav was given the award of the best actress for the film ` Dhag ` and director of this film Shivaji Patil for the best director award .
` Vicky Donor ` the film based on the sperm donation and Malyalam film ` Ustad Hotel ` have been given the best entertaining movie award jointly .
With Dolly , the award of the best supporting actress was given to actress Kalpana for the Malyalam film ` Tanichalla Najan ` .
Director Sujay Ghosh was declared the best original script writer for the Hindi film ` Kahani ` .
For this film , Vidya Balan , who has received many prizes remained unsuccessful to get the national Award continuously second year .
Last year , she had got the national award for the film ` Dirty Picture ` .
The second award to the ` Kahani ` was brought up by Namrata Rao for the best editing .
Acted by Parsh Rawal , for the ` Oh My God ` , Ramesh Shukla and Bhavesh Mandaliya were given the best adapted screenplay .
For the song ` Bolo Na ` from ` Chatgaon ` , Prashoon Joshi got the best lyricist whereas , the best background singer to Shankar Mahadevan .
For the song ` Palke na Mundu ` from the Marathi film ` Sanhita ` , Arti Anklekar Tikekar was given the best background singer award .
Both the singers also presented this song in the program .
In the special prizes of the jury , the awards were given to Bangla film ` Chidangda ` beside ` Talash ` acted by Amir Khan , ` Gangs of Wasepur ` , ` Kahani ` and ` Dekh India Circus .
For the ` Ustad Hotel ` , Anjali Menon got the best script writer award .
` Tanichalla Najan ` with the best supporting actress also got the Nargis Dutt award for the best feature film in the National Integrity category .
The Malyalam film ` Spirit ` , which is made on the addiction got the best film award on the social issues .
The award of the best children film the Hindi film ` Dekh Indian Circus ` and the award of the best child actor Virendra Pratap who played the main role in this shared with ` 101 Chodiyangal ` .
` Delhi Safari ` , directed by Nikhil Adwani got the best animation film award .
The controversial film of Kamal Hasan , ` Vishwarupam ` brought the award of the best production design on his name .
For this film itself , Birju Maharaj got the award of the best choreographer .
Malayalam film ` Kaliyanchan ` and Marathi film ` Sanhita ` brought the award of the best music director on their name .
Telugu film ` Iga ` brought in his name the award of the best special effects .
BD Garg was given the award of the best book , for the book , written in English ` Silent Cinema in India-A pictorial Journey ` .
Recently , Garg has died .
Whereas , the name of the Malyalam writer P . s. Radhakrishanan and Piyush Roy was mentioned especially .
The best costume designer for the Tamil picture ` Pardeshi ` , to Purnima Ramaswami , whereas , the award of the best makeup artist to Raja for the Tamil film ` Wajakkuen 18 bata 9 ` were given .
The award of the best cinematography was given to ` Ko : YAD ` .
The chairman of the 11 membered jury of the feature film were senior film maker Basu Chartjee whereas , the chairman of the jury of the non-feature film was Aruna Raje .
The program was conducted by the actor R . Madhawan and actress Huma Kureshi .
In the film , which is being made to celebrate the 100th years of the cinema , ` Bombay Talkies ` a song will be included also which was filmed on Amitabh Bachchan and Rekha .
` Bombay Talkies ` is based on the four short stories directed by the directors like Zoya Akhtar , Anurag Kashyap , Dibakar Banarjee and Karan Johar .
In the song included in this ` Apna Bombay Talkies ` through the old and new generation , it has been tried to bring the history of the hundred years of the Indian Cinema on celluloid .
The pair of Amitabh and Rekha has given many hit films in the decade of the seventies like Anjane , Suhag , Mukaddar ka Sikandar , Ganga Ki Saugandh , Mistar Natwarlal and Ram Balram .
Last time both were seen in the film of the Yash Chopra , Silsila , 31 years ago .
If we will talk about the film ` Bombay Talkies ` then in the first of this title track , with the big film celebrities of the past era like Prithvi Raj Kapoor , Nargis Dutta , Madhubala , Vaheeda Rahman , Shatrughan Sinha , Amitabh Bachchan , Tanuja , Zeenat Aman , Rishi Kapoor , Hema Malini , Rekha , Praveen Bobby , many known faces has been included .
This part of the movie is black & white .
Taking the small parts of these actors ` films , it has been mixed in this way with the VFX techniques that on screen it seems that song has been filmed on them itself .
According to a statement published toward the side of the film producers , it took the time of four months to make the song .
It has been filmed tremendously .
For this song , Amit Trivedi and Vaibhavee Marchet put lots of efforts and in this the parts of the many films like Sholay , Pyasa , Mugla-e-Azam have been included .
It seems that just after doing the Badmash Babali item song , Priyanka Chopra is becoming the addicted to do the item number .
Now , she is going to do a item number in her upcoming film , which is the remake of the hit film ` Jajeer ` which was released in 1973 .
According to the sources , Priyanka will be presented in this item number , named ` Pinki ` , very glamorously .
It will be choreographed by the famous choreographer Ganesh Acharya .
It is being said that Apurva Lakhiya is directing this film .
It is worth pondering that recently , Priyana has done her first item number for ` Shootout At Wadala ` .
It is being said that Priyanka Chopra is going to do the item number in the film , which is the remake of the hit film ` Janjeer ` which was released in 1973 .
Priyanka Chopra , who has allured everyone from her attractive delicacy , once again will show her magic in this .
Right now , Priyanka Chopra is engrossed in the film of the Sanjay Leela Bhansali .
This film is based on the wrestler Marry Com , who has won the bronze medal in the Olympic .
In this film , Priyanka is playing the character of Marry Com .
Looking at this interest of Priyanka that through this she will make her position in the heart of her fans more strong .
The popular actress of the past era , Mala Sinha refused to take the prestigious Dada Saheb Falke Academy Award .
Mala Sinha said that committee members has insulted me , till this extent that they did not find it essential to write my name over invitation card even .
I accept that Asha Bhonsle and Yash Chopra are superfine people , who are being given this award , but am I a such small actress that the need has not been understood to give my name in this list .
Such award will not be given to me then that is better , I do not want this .
Let me inform you that this award was supposed to give her on the function which was organised on 30th April , but she did not take this award and also did not participate in the function .
Mala said showing her disappointment that the chairman of the Falke Committee had come home by his own and had said that as an old artist she should accept this honor .
But seeing the absence of her name on the invitation card , Mala Sinha became upset .
Beside Mala , Asha Bhonsle and late Yash Chopra was honored by this award , this year .
On this occasion , Pamela Chopara took the award on behalf of Yash .
Mala has shown her happiness , on giving the honor to Asha and Chopara .
He also participated in the press conference related to announcement about the awards on 25th April and she was very thrilled with getting this award .
Actress Mala Sinha is one of the few actresses , in her the combination of beauty with marvelous acting is getting to see .
Her childhood name was Alda and the children who used to study in the school used to call her . Dalda . .
Later , she kept her name Mala Sinha instead of Albert Sinha .
In a drama in the school , after seeing the acting of Mala Sinha the known director of the Bangla film , Ardhendu Bose became very impressed and offer her to work in her film ` Roshan Ara ` .
In the done movie in 1954 ` Badshah ` , Mala Sinha got chance to work with Pradeep Kumar which was her first movie as an actress .
Mala Sinha , who reached to an event organised by the Dada Saheb Falke Academy in Mumbai , says , I consider that the change which came in cinema is good .
In our time , film used to be made very slowly .
If only , I would have been working in this era .
Film producer Karan Johar lost his temperament in the occasion organised in the Siri Ford Auditorium on the happiness of the completion of the 100th years of Hindi Cinema .
This was happened , that on Sunday , a conference had been organised on the completion of 100 years of the Indian cinema in that , popular film directors Karan Johar , Zoya Akhtar , Dibakar Banarjee and Dhritimaan Chartjee talked with the audiences directly .
While talking with the audiences , on an audience question , Karan Johar became angry , not just this he said rapist to an audience .
Zoya Akhtar asked that why do audiences go to the cinema hall to watch the bad fi s ?
During the conference , the screening of the Bombay Talkies was supposed to be done , but at the last moment it was canceled .
Film producer and directors talked openly on the issues like censorship , social and financial pressure .
Dada Saheb Phalke aka Dhundiraj Phalke , who got the award of the father of the Indian Cinema , weaven his dream of the cinema when , in this country , any clear genre of this art had not taken the form also .
When we were dependent on abroad for the techniques and machines which were used in the cinema , at that point of time Phalke brought the first silent film of India ` Raja Harishchandra ` .
Phalke made his first film ` Raja Harishchandra ` in 1912 , which was a silent film and first feature film of the country .
In the production of the film , almost 15 thousand rupees was invested .
At that time it was a huge amount .
Phalke completed the picture somehow , then its release became a big problem .
During those days , dramas were most popular .
In two anas people used to take pleasure of the drama of the six hours .
In such case , who would have seen the film of one hour spending three anas .
Perhaps this was the reason that to attract the audiences Phalke advertised it in a completely new way .
` Watch 57 thousand pictures in the two miles long film just in three anas ` .
Advertisement of the first film of the India ` Raja Harishchandra ` was something like this .
The first film of the India was in front of the audiences .
Due to being a mute film , the introduction of the characters and dialogues were spoken behind the screen .
At that time , the character of women used to be done by the male itself , thus , in the film , the character of queen Taramati was played by a man named Salunke .
People were praying on the occasion of the birthday of the famous actor-director , Manoj Kumar , that the operation of his gold bladder should be successful .
The present director of the hospital said that his gold bladder has been decayed with the stone and Wednesday morning he will be operated .
After the complaint of the pain in the gall-bladder , the actor has been admitted in the hospital .
According to the sources , to rescue from the media , Manoj Kumar has been admitted with his original name Harikrishna Goswami .
It is worth pondering that due to his illness itself , Manoj Kumar could not go to the funeral of his friend Pran .
He was showing regret for this since last few days .
Manoj Kumar was born on 24th July , 1937 in Abotabad of Pakistan .
His real name is Harikishan Giri Goswami .
After the partition of the country his family had settled down in Hanumangadh district of Rajasthan .
After graduating from the Hindu Collage , Delhi , Manoj Kumar stepped into the film industry and in the year 1975 Manoj started his career from the film ` Fashion ` .
Manoj Kumar used to like generally to wear close necked clothes .
It is either Kurta or shirt .
Beside that , you will see one hand of Manoj Kumar keeping over his mouth .
Manoj Kumar liked more patriotic films , than romance in the films .
Manoj Kumar was very influenced by Dilip Kumar and he kept his name Manoj on the Dilip Kumar ` s name of the character of the film Shabanam .
Manoj Kumar stepped on the silver screen from the film Fashion which was made in the year 1957 .
His first film as a leading actor was ` Kanch Ki Guriya ` -LRB- 1906 -RRB- .
After this , his two more films , Piya Milan Ki Aas and Reshmi Rumal , came but his first hit film was ` Hariyali and Rasta ` -LRB- 1962 -RRB- .
Manoj Kumar had worked in the good films like Himalaya Ki God Me , Gumnam , Do Badan , Pathar Ke Sanam , Yadagar , Shor , Sanyasy , Das Nambari Aur Clerk .
His last film was Maidan-E-Jang -LRB- 1995 -RRB- .
As a director , he had made his last film ` Jai Hind ` in 1999 .
In 1975 , he had been given the Filmfare award of the best director for ` Roti Kapra aur Makan ` .
In 1992 , he was honored by the Padmashree Award also .
Manoj Kumar , who has proved his talent of acting has been honored with the National Award of the best story writer for the film ` Saheed ` .
Among the seven Filmfare Awards , four were given to ` Upakar ` .
Upakar got the award in the categories of the best film , best director , the best story and the best dialogue .
Manoj Kumar is making the film ` Akhiri Goli ` , based on the revolutionaries before the independence .
Manoj Kumar said , this is based on the philosophy and ideas of revolutionaries of two kinds , he himself has written the story of which .
This actor , who mesmerized the people with his powerful acting in the patriotic films like Upakar and Kranti , said that for this film all the new actors have been taken .
He said , I have selected few people and now finalizing the name .
At the beginning of the hearing , Salman will be informed that under which sections the case will run over him .
After this , it will be asked from Salman Khan that , does he consider himself guilty in this issue or t ?
If Salman Khan will accept his guilt , then the trial will not run and Salman will refuse all the accusations then against him the trial will be run .
It is to know that in this issue , the case of just driving the car recklessly was running on him .
Bandra court had given the order against Salman Khan to run the case under unintentional murder .
The bodyguard of Salman Khan had told him clearly that , any big accident may occur from driving the car while drunk .
Despite that , Salman did not hear him and kept driving at higher speed and such a big accident occurred .
After the accident , in the blood sample , which was taken from Salman Khan , the amount of 60ml alcohol had found , which was more than the determined standard .
If the case of unintentional murder run against Salman Khan and he is found guilty then he could have imprisonment for 10 years .
At the time of the last hearing , in the court , Judge treated Salman like an accused .
During the hearing , Salman sat at the place of general public , but judge said him that he is an accused hence he will have to sit on the place of accused .
After the order of the judge , Salman had to change his seat .
Mahmood , who made people laugh and tickle by his special style and voice , did not become an actor just like that , for this he had to struggle hard .
Born in 1933 , Mahmood used to dream to be an actor since childhood itself .
His father used to work in the Mumtaz Ali Bombay Talkies Studio .
In the year 1943 , Mahmood got the chance to play the childhood character of Ashok Kumar in Kismat .
Meanwhile , Mahmood learned car driving and after the success of the film of Gyan Mukharjee ` Sasural ` , actor Mahmood became successful to make his recognition in the film industry .
In the Hindi film , name of Mahmood among comedians comes first who brought comedy actors near to the leading actors by raising the height .
The star of Mahmood ` fate shined when during a shooting of a film , a junior actor could not speak his dialogues after continuous ten retake even .
Later , this dialogue was given Mahmood to deliver , he made it ok at once without retake .
For this dialogue , Mahmood got hundred rupees as remuneration .
As a driver he used to get just 75 rupees in a month .
After this , Mahmood quitted driving and enrolled his name in the Junior Artist Association .
With this he started to struggle to get the work in the films .
As a junior artist MAhmood did the small roles in the films like `` Do Bigha Zamin `` , `` Jagriti `` , `` CID `` and `` Pyasa `` .
In `` Parwarish `` which was released in the year 1958 , first time Mahmood got a good character .
In this , he played the role of the brother of Raj Kapoor .
After this , Mahmood got the recognition in the film industry in `` Sasural `` of M . V. Prasad as a comedy actor .
After this , the pair of Mahmood and Shobha Khote worked in many films with `` Ziddi `` and `` Love In Tokeyo `` .
To rescue from the monotony which came in his characters , Mahmood also did many types of roles .
Among these films the name of `` Padosan `` comes first .
In this Mahmood played the negative character and became successful to get the applause from the audiences .
In the film Padosan , playing the role of the Indian music teacher he made the history of the Indian musical comedy .
In Padoshan the great actors like Kishor Kumar and Sunil Dutt were also there .
`` Padosan `` is counted one of the best comedy films in the Hindi Cine World .
Mahmood were the friend ` s friend and helpmate of those who struggled .
One side he gave break to Rahul Dev Burman in `` Chote Nawab `` , and on the other hand , later gave the role of the hero to Amitabh Bachchan who later became the great actor in `` Bombay To Goa `` when the stars of the Big B were down .
Mahmood , Who worked as an actor , director , story writer and producer , made his last film `` Dushman Duniya Ka `` in 1996 , casting the present king of the Bollywood , Shahrukh Khan .
During the last days of his life , the health of Mahmood became worst .
He went to America for treatment , where he died on 23rd July , 2004 .
What could be bigger thing than this for Baba Sidiqui including the Bollywood that in the party thrown by him , the khan war was ended up .
Yes , in the Iftar party which was given in Mumbai , Shahrukh Khan and Salim Khan were present there since before .
Salman Khan also comes there .
Salman meets with the people who were sitting there .
Shahrukh was also present there .
But initially , he goes bit ahead from that place , where Shahrukh had sat .
But , he comes back later and put the hand over the shoulder of Shahrukh .
Then , in front of everyone Salman and Shahrukh hugs each other .
Seems , this sight was explaining that problem between these two has been cleared away .
Let me tell you , between these two actors quarrel had occurred in the birthday party of Katrina Kaif .
Since then , they both have avoided facing each other at public places .
During an Iftar party in Mumbai , Salman and Shahrukh tried to give the message by hugging each other that the distances have been rubbed off between them .
Rajat writes that everything became fine between King Khan and Sallu .
Such a big problem was solved .
Finally , now we may think to solve the small problems like poverty and corruption .
Deepak writes that Siddiqui will keep this moment , capturing in the picture , in his home for the lifetime and will say my Karan-Arjun came there .
Bollywood actress , Katrina Kaif was seen recently enjoying in Spain wearing bikini with her friend Ranbir Kapoor .
Ranbeer Kapoor and Katrina Kaif are coming closer day by day .
That closer that , last time , even after spending long vacation , both are not leaving any chance to spend time together .
In the pictures which were taken at the Ibeza beach in Spain , Ranbeer and Katrina could be seen enjoying .
Expecting this , after watching the picture that there is no intimate relation between these two seems impossible .
According to a magazine , these pictures were taken when both went to Spain to spend the vacation this month .
Right now , both are working together in a film named Bombay Velvet .
In the year 2009 , Katrina and Ranbeer had worked together for the first time in the film Ajab Prem Ki Gajab Kahani .
Film was hit and after that the news of love-affair between both had started .
Although , till now no one from both of them has confirmed their beginning of relation of romance between them .
The magic of Katrina Kaif , who is included among the Bollywood number one actresses , making her fans fascinated .
Katrina always remains in news , either it is her dance in the song ` Sheela Ki Jawani ` or her relation with salman .
For the last few years , due to her captivating acts Katrina Kaif has made her distinct position in the Bollywood .
Let us tell you that actor Salman Khan had bitten Katrina Kaif on the set of the film Ek tha Tiger , due to that the distance had occurred between them .
In the life of Meena Kumari , the great actress of the Bollywood and popular by the name Tragedy Queen , sorrow keep prickling the needles till the last breath .
It is the 81st birthday of Meena Kumari on 1st August .
Meena Kumari who reign over the Bollywood for 40 years , kept fighting from her loneliness for the whole life .
Meena Kumari reached to the height of the Hindi Cinema , that is still untouchable .
Due to the melancholy end in the most of the films of her , she has been given the award of the Tragedy Queen of the Bollywood .
How she penned down the feelings of her heart , after reading that it seems that like someone is pricking thousands of needles silently in the nerves .
Whatever emotional form she gave to the relation with sorrow , that is the matter of the capability of very less artists .
Meena Kumari had born on 1st August 1932 , in Mumbai .
His father Ali Bakhs was also the artist of the Parasi theater .
Her mother was a famous actor and dancer of the theater , which had relation to the family of Ravindranath Tagore .
Just after the birth , Abba Ali Bakhsh left her in a Muslim orphanage due to the lack of the money and from the burden of two daughters already .
After the very much crying of the mother , he brought her back .
Either family or married life , Meena Jee got just lonliness .
Two sisters of Meena Kumari aka Mazahabin were - Khurshid and Mahalaka .
In last , Meena Kumari had been presented in front of the director Vijay Bhatt at the age of just four years and then as a child actress Meena Kumari did twenty films .
Due to the selfish nature of her father , she had hated him and this was the beginning of selfish man in her life .
She was not an ordinary actress .
The tragedy of her life , grief and mystery used to peep out from her poetry , that kept glimpsing properly in those characters , which she played .
Who can forget the character of Choti Bahu in the film `` Saheb Bibi and Gulam `` .
The image of that actress who sings Na Jao Saiyan Chuda Ke Baiya . never comes down from the memory .
In 1962 , for the best actress Meena Kumari got three nominations together , `` Sahab Bibi Gulam `` , `` Mai Chup Rahungi `` and `` Arati `` .
Thus , Menna Kumari could contest with Meena Kumari herself .
Beautiful lightning face like the moon and the pain in the voice , really the name of the rare achievement was Meena Kumari .
She has been given the awards like Tragedy Queen means the queen of pains .
But if we do investigations of her whole acting world , then such kind of `` type casting `` would be the injustice with her cinema personality .
All the actors who worked with Meena Kumari were the fan of the beauty of Meena Kumari .
But Meena Kumari saw the feeling of love toward her in the popular producer Kamal Amrohi .
First time , after getting the selfless love from someone she became so happy that she married with Kamal .
Even here , she got the position of the second wife of Kamal .
But , despite that even , she spent the beautiful 10 years of her life with Kamal .
After 10 years , the distance started to increase between Kamal and Meena Kumari and then Meena Kumari separated from her husband .
The reason for this separation had become Dharmendra who had started his filmy career at that time itself .
Dharmendra was the third selfish person who came in the life of Meena Kumari .
At that time the career of Dharmendra was not running very fine and films of Meena Kumari were being hit one after one .
Meena Kumari was that star of the Bollywood ` s sky , everyone was impatient just to touch that .
While sharing the lonliness of the life with Dharmendra , Meena Kumari came closer to him .
Lots of gossips and news started to come about both .
Like the sinking boat of the Dharmendra ` s career got the sore and slowly the career of Dharmendra also started to touch the heights also .
On the power of her reputation , Meena Kumari tried completely to take the career of Dharmendra to the heights .
But after the success of Phool and Kante Dharmendra started to make distance from Meena Kumari .
And once again , Meena Kumari remained aloof in the way of her life .
Meena could not bare the infidelity of Dharmendra and due to taking liquor more than limit she suffered from the disease of Liver Cirrhosis .
It is said that Dada Muni Ashok Kumar , with whom Meena had done many films , did not see this condition of Meena Kumari .
He took the homeopathic pills and went to Meena Kumari then Meena refused to take the medicine saying this - I will not be living even after taking medicine , I know this .
Hence let me eat tobacco , let the some gulp of liquor go down from the neck .
This great and beautiful actress Meena Kumari succumbed in 1972 .
In 1972 itself , the film Pakiza was released also .
Initially , this film did not get the success , but the death of Meena made this film superhit .
In the film making , it had taken almost seventeen years .
In the hospital where Meena Kumari died , she did not have money to pay the bill of that hospital .
The bill of that hospital was paid by a doctor of that hospital itself who was a big fan of Meena Kumari .
Rafi started to take training of music in Lahore by Ustad Abdul Wahid Khan .
Simultaneously , he also started to learn the Indian Classical music from Ghulam Ali Khan .
Once , Hameed went to the music program of K . L. Sahgal , taking Rafi with him .
But K . L. Sehgal refused to sing due to the absence of electricity .
Hameed requested the organiser of the program that he shall give the opportunity to sing to his brother Rafi .
After approval of the organiser , Rafi presented his first song on the stage in front of audiences in the age of 13 years .
Shyam Sundar who was sitting among the audiences liked his song and he offered Rafi to come to Mumbai .
In the year 1949 , through the song ` Suhani Raat Dhal Chuki ` which was sung under the music direction of Naushad in the film Dulari , Rafi reached to the height of the success .
After this he never looked back .
Rafi , who was said the voice of the popular artists like Dilip Kumar , Devanand , Shammi Kapoor , Rajendra Kumar , Shashi Kapor , Rajkumar , sung more than 26000 songs for 700 films in his whole cine career .
Beside Hindi films , Mohammad Rafi has also sung for Marathi and Telugu films .
Mohammad Rafi was honored six times by Filmfare award in his career .
In the year 1965 , Rafi was honored by Padmashree award also .
The uncrowned king of the world of the singing , Mohammad Rafi was known in the film industry for his polite nature .
But , once he had discussed with the Kokil Kanth Lata Mangeshkar .
Mohammad Rafi had sung hundred of songs with Lata Mangeshkar , but the time had come when Rafi had stopped talking with Lata .
Lata Mangeshkar was in favor of royalty over the songs , whereas , Rafi never asked for royalty .
Rafi Sahab used to think that once if directors gave the money , then for what royalty would be asked .
The conflict between them raised that much that even the conversation between Mohammad Rafi and Lata Mangeshkar was stopped and both refused to sing together .
Although , after four years , from the effort of Nargis both sang together in a program the song ` Dil Pukare ` .
Mohammad Rafi was a big fan of the great actor of the Bollywood , Amitabh Bachchan .
Rafi was not the fondest of watching the film , but sometimes he used to watch the film .
Once , Rafi watched the film ` Deewar ` of Amitabh Bachchan .
After watching Deewar Rafi became a big fan of Amitabh .
Beside Amitabh , Rafi used to like the films of Shammi Kapoor and Dharmendra very much .
Mohammad Rafi liked very much the film of Amitabh-Dharmendra ` Shole ` and he had seen it three times .
On 30th July 1980 , after completing the song ` Sham Kyoun Udas hai Dost ` of the film ` Aas Pas ` , Rafi told to Lakshmikant Pyarelal - Should I leave , after hearing this Lakshmikant Pyarelal became surprised .
Because before this , Rafi never had talked with them like this .
Next day , on 31st July 1980 Rafi had heart stroke and he left leaving this world behind .
The famous singer and musician of the Bollywood , Sonu Nigam is celebrating his 39th birthday on 30the July .
Sonu Nigam had born on 30th July , in Pharidabad of Haryana .
His father Agam Kumar was a popular stage singer of Delhi .
With his father , Sonu had started to do stage show at the age of three years itself .
Under the guidance of the father itself Sonu preceded his career .
After doing study till the 12th standard , he did further education through distance education .
When Sonu was just 19 years old , then he started to sing the song for Bollywood films .
The initial days of Sonu Nigam in Mumbai were full of struggle .
Sonu Nigam sang the first time for the film ` Aaja Meri Jaan ` .
Unfortunately , this film never was released and after that Sonu got a fabulous chance to record the song for T-series .
In the career of Sonu Nigam , TV serial Sa Re Ga Ma also played an important role .
Sonu was the host of this show .
Sonu gave many fabulous songs in his career .
Sonu has won many awards also for his singing .
After the struggle of sometimes , Sonu got the work .
To sing the song of his source of motivation Mohammad Rafi Saheb .
Through the series ` Rafi Ki Yade ` , the journey of Sonu ` s singing started .
People liked the voice , but whoever heard they felt him the clone of Rafi .
Sonu Nigam has been the most demanding singer of the Bollywood .
His every song becomes successful .
He is only singer , who refused to sing for the Oscar winner A . R. Rahman just for this , because the lyrics of the song seem absurd to him .
Sonu Nigam had married to a girl from a Bengali family , Madhurima and now they have a son also Nivaan , who has recorded a song with Lata Mangeshkar .
Sonu Nigam got the Filmfare awards two times for the films ` Saathiya ` , ` Kal Ho Na Ho ` .
Not just this , for ` Kal Ho Na Ho ` , he has been also honored by the National Film Award for best playback singer .
Sonu Nigam has got two times filmfare award ` South ` s Award ` also .
` Ye Dhoke Pyar Ke Dhoke ` and ` Accha Sila Diya Tune Mere Pyar Ka ` started to be played in every house .
Between this , in the year 1997 ` Pardes ` comes .
Sharukh Khan , Apurva Agnihotri and Mahima Choudhary had played the main characters in this romantic film of Subhash Ghai .
The song ` Ye Dil Diwana , Diwana Hai Ye Dil ` which was sung by Sonu Nigam made the place in the public ` s heart .
This song was absolutely sad , but its speed was beating with the changing world .
In his this long film career , beside Hindi Sonu Nigam sang in Kannad , Malyalam , Punjabi and all the languages .
In every language her voice was liked .
He became anchor on TV , became an actor , became Radio Jocky , did the dubbing of Hollywood films , thus to his voice he has given every time a new challenge .
Shahrukh Khan will be seen in the character of the great player Dhyanchand who is called the magician of Hockey .
Many times he also said that hockey is very dear to him .
Priyanka Chopra keeps singing pop songs by pairing herself with International singers .
Beside these two , there are other actors in the film world , who are fond of other genre beside acting .
It is known to everyone the painting love of Salman Khan .
the paintings made by him have been sold in lakhs also .
It is said that during the break of the shooting of the films , it remained his hobby to do the painting .
Many art critics also praise his painting .
Ranbeer Kapoor , who became guitarist in ` Rockstar ` knows to play the drum very well .
People say that his hands move on the drums like any professional .
In real life not like a drummer , but as a guitarist , he has been seen in ` Rockstar ` .
During its shooting , just after finishing of shot he used to reach to the drum , leaving guitar .
On the set of this film people came to know about this hobby of him .
If the first love of Ranveer Singh of ` Band Baja Baarat ` is acting , then second love is creative writing itself .
When he felt that , to become an actor is a problem , the he had gone to USA for the course of his second passion creative writing .
Saif , who is playing the character of a reckless youth in the film ` Cocktail ` is a fabulous guitarist in real life .
He has given proof to be a great guitarist in many award functions , he has been seen playing the guitar in the film ` Race ` also .
In the real life he also like the sport of Polo .
His fans are also the admirer of his guitar playing .
Sonam Kapoor is trained in the Kathak .
She has passion of book collection and reading .
In her films , often , her character is shown holding the book .
Her Kathak skills had been used in her debut film ` Sanwariya ` .
Isha Sharwani is trained in South Indian marshal art Kalari Payattu , Chau dance and Kathak .
In her debut film ` Kisana ` directed by Subhash Ghai , she has presented her dance skill .
Recently , audiences enjoyed her dance performance in the TV show ` Jhalak Dikhala Jaa ` .
Beside film actress her recognition is due to this special art of her .
Rahul Bose is a marvelous actor .
But Rahul Bose is also a fabulous Ragbi player .
He has been the part of the International team of India .
Deepika Padukon has played Badminton on the state level .
Ameesha Patel is trained in the Bharatnatyam .
Lara Dutta is called perfect in the Salsa dance .
Her this skill has been portrayed on screen , in many films .
Neha Dhupiya , Neetu Chandra and Isha Koppikar are trained in Karate .
The love of Akshay Kumar with Marshal art in real life is known to every one .
Akshay is a Black Belt in Taikwando .
Beside personal life , he presents his skill of Marshal art fully and this is his USP .
He is a great stuntman and does stunt himself .
Madhuri Dixit has an old connection with Kathak .
She has been using her dance hobby in the film also tremendously .
She has got the award of Dancing Queen .
She got to show the Kathak purely in Sanjay Leela Bhansali ` s film ` Devadas ` .
Recently , to collect the money to help a child in Dubai , clothes , shoes etc . things of Bollywood stars were auctioned .
In this auction which happened in Dubai , the clothes of Hritik Roshan , Salman Khan , Ranbeer Kapoor and Deepika Padukon , etc . stars were kept .
With this , the jacket of Hrithik Roshan there left back also the clothes of Salman Khan , Ranbeer Kapoor and many big stars .
The leather jacket , which Ranbeer has wore in Rockstar , that was auctioned in 10,000 durham .
There , the trouser which wore Salman with the blue colored shirt , that was bought by a fan of Salman , Sairiya in 10,000 Duraham .
More than all these , the black jacket of Hrithik Roshan left everything back .
The price of the black jacket of Hrithik was 11000 Durham .
The jacket of Hrithik was liked most .
Then , he is general person or special one .
In the recent years , like the players of team India the superstars of the Hindi film world who has been honored by the metaphors ` Mard ` , ` Dabang ` , King Khan ` and ` Greek God ` and ` Khiladi ` also has been in the capture of stroke and diseases .
The current example is of Hrithik Roshan .
Recently , during the shooting of ` Bang Bang ` his head was hurt .
Due to that , the disease Sabdural Hematoma happened to him , in which it bleeds from the nerves of the brain .
Result of that , he had to admit in the hospital in rush , where the successful brain surgery happened .
According to the doctors , he could come back to the work with in four hours .
Last year when Hrithik was shooting for ` Agnipath ` , then itself the problem in his waist started .
After the doctor ` s treatment and just after the few days of vacation from the shooting this problem started .
Hrithik has approved the news of the waist pain in the interview , which was given during that period .
Simultaneously , praising his co-star Sanjay Dutt he said also that Sanju is above 50 , despite that he is more fit in comparison of me .
Hrithik became fan of the fitness of Rishi Kapoor who is older than Sanju .
According to the Hrithik , Rishi Sir is about my father ` s age , but his agility on the set is perplexing .
Hence , just few days before from Hrithik surgery of King Khan happened .
He was hurt on his shoulder during his film ` Ra-one ` , which emerged during the shooting of Chennai Express .
The result of that , he had to do the surgery of the shoulder .
This was eighth surgery , which was done due to the stroke of Shahrukh , who works 300 days in a year .
` Dabang ` is suffering from the strange disease Trizeminal Nurolaziya .
Due to that it pains in the nerves of his face .
In the year 2011 , he had operation in America and had become well .
Later , during the shooting of ` Ek The Tiger ` that problem with him started again .
Even doctor said this that he should not do stunt , but according to Salman who listens doctors .
I am more concerned for my fans .
They want to see me in the role , on screen , how could I deprive them of that .
Salman retained on his words .
In ` Dabang 2 ` also , his stunts full of blast got to see .
This year , in January he was suppose to start ` Mental ` of his younger brother , then his disease attacked and he had to go to America for the checkup .
As for the result , the film would not be able to release on salman ` s lucky slot of Ied .
There is hope to get the benefit of that to ` Chennai Express ` of Shahrukh .
The ` Mard ` of the Industry also had to take a long break from the work of the films and Tv due to a stomach ache .
He was treated during the last month of last year and beginning months of this year .
He became fit then did the shooting , first season six of ` Kaun Banega Carorepati ` and the film of Prakash Jha ` Satyagrah ` .
Last year on 21st September , during the shooting of ` Department ` of Ramu also , Big B got hurt slightly in the ribs .
One week before that accident , during the shooting of Rohit Shetty ` s film ` Bol Bachchan ` in Jaipur , Abhishek Bachchan also came back Mumbai after getting hurt on the forehead and getting six stitches .
On the other side , the news of falling ill of superstar Rajnikant and to go to the abroad also remained overwhelmed .
Due to that , the shooting of his films ` Rana ` and ` ` Kochaidiyan ` got affected .
In the series of those who got hurt is Akshay Kumar also .
Recently , during the shooting of ` Pistol ` while doing the stunt Akshay fell down from stairs and injured his ankle .
His saying is this , that it is good that I did not fall from the sixth floor , from where I started to stunt .
During the shooting of ` Jilla Gajiyabaad ` Vivek Oberai had hurt his back after falling down .
After that he had to send back to Mumbai .
Vivek also have old relations with strokes .
During the shooting of Maniratnam ` s ` Yuva ` in Calcutta , he had been injured badly after falling from the bike .
Yes , among these superstars , Amir Khan and Ajay Devagan are such artists , the incidents of getting hurt of them come to listen less .
The film of Ranbeer Kapoor Ye Jawani Hai Deewani is completely prepared to be released in the Russia .
Ranbeer is very happy from this thing that he is showcasing in the country , from that country his grandfather has special bonding .
In this film of the director Ayaan Mukharjee , Ranbeer will do romance with his ex-girlfriend Deepika .
This is the first film of Ranbeer that will be released in the Russia .
Ranbeer said , my grandfather was very popular in the Russia .
The people of Russia used to like grandfather and his film very much .
Ranbeer said , eventually I have got this opportunity that I can release my film Ye Jawani Hai Deewani In the Russia .
I feel this , that there is a big market of Indian Cinema in the Russia .
From my opinion , in abroad , people are liking Indian Cinema .
Indian films are liked very much in Brazil , Japan , China and Russia .
People are waiting eagerly for the film of Ranbeer Kapoor and Deepika Padukon ` Ye Jawani Hai Deewani ` .
The fabulous songs of the film seem attracting the audiences .
The expert on cinema trends is anticipating that after release the film will do the business of more than 100 crores .
This year , the film Race has earned 100 crore rupees .
It is being hoped that this film could cross the clincher of 200 crores .
Audiences are liking the songs of the film .
Badatmeez dil , Balam pichkari or Kabira , all have gone over the mouth of the audiences .
The film of Ayaan Mukharjee has earned hundred crores before the releasing .
The satellite right of the film in 29 crore , music right seven crore , overseas distribution 11 crore and video and other rights have been sold in two and a half crores .
Now , just there is the wait of Friday , will have to watch that how much blast the film does after release .
After doing the deal of 130 crores for the reality show ` Big Boss 7 ` , Salman khan has proved that , with big screen he is ahead of everyone in earning money on small screen also .
In Big Boss 7 , Sallu will earn 5 crores every episode , whereas , in the matter of earning money on the TV rest of the superstars are even not near to him .
Among the most expensive actors after Salman the name of Mister Perfectionist Amir Khan comes .
Amir , from his first TV show ` Satyamev Jayate ` had earned 3 crores per episode .
Salman broke his record .
Third number is of Shahrukh khan who recently has reduced bitterness in the relation by hugging Salman .
King Khan had taken 2 crore rupees for an episode of his show ` Jor ka Jhatka : Total Wipeout ` which was presented on NDTV Imagine , two years back .
Hrithik Roshan is also not behind than SRK in this matter .
Hrithik Roshan who played the part of the judge in the dancing show ` Just Dance ` was taking 2 crore rupees per episode .
Akshay Kumar had taken the fees at the rate of one and a half crore per episode in ` Khataron Ke Khiladi ` .
Whereas Big B had done the deal of 100 crores all together last year for the third season of ` Kaun Banega Carorepati ` .
This time 26 episode of KBC is supposed to be displayed hence if it will be seen per episode then in the matter of earning money he is also behind Akshay Kumar .
Sanjay Dutt , who is sentenced presently also has played the role of the host in Big Boss with Salman Khan , but in the rate of him and Sallu there is the difference of day-night .
It is said that Sanjay used to get 1 crore rupees for an episode .
If it will be talked about actresses then they are far behind in earning money in comparison of the actors .
For now , Madhuri Dixit is on top in this matter , who earned 50 lakh rupees per episode in ` Jhalak Dikhala Jaa ` .
This much fees Priyanka Chopra used to take for the third season of ` Khataron Ke Khiladi ` .
Whereas , Preeti Zinta used to get 35 lakhs for one episode in ` Guineas Book Of World Record : Ab India Todega ` .
Of course , there is a big difference in the fees of film stars .
But there is no second thought that they are getting the chance to earn the huge money in the world of the TV . About this , it is the saying of the film critic and trade analyst , Taran Adarsh that now the difference of the big and small screen has been vanished .
Everyone is known about the approach of the TV .
In the coming years , every actor will wish to be the part of the TV show , beginning of which starts with the highest TRP .
The known actor of Bollywood , Mukesh Khanna has said that no one could play the character of Shaktimaan better than him .
The telefilm of Mukesh Khanna ` Hamara Hero Shaktimaan ` is going to be presented .
It is assumption of Mukesh Khanna that only he could play the character of Shaktimaan .
He said that I can not make Shaktimaan , taking Akshay Kumar , Sharukh Khan and Ajay Devagan .
They are certainly a good actor , but they don ` t have that image which I have .
Mukesh Khanna said that Krish was not a superhero , he had saved the life of his father .
Krish 3 is also not a superhero .
He also does not consider Ra .
One a superhero .
It is worth pondering that Shaktiman which was displayed on Durdarshan is considered as a first hero of India .
The telefilm made on Shaktimaan ` Hamara Hero Shaktimaan ` will be shown on 30 June on cartoon channel Pogo .
Barf is a film which tells a silent love story .
This film has made people understand the silent voice of the love .
Film Barfi has helped to bring the career of Priyanka Chopra and Ranbeer Kapoor to a new step .
It was a big challenge in itself for the National award winner actress Priyanka Chopra to work in a film like Barfi after Agnipath .
After this performance of Priyanka , film critics are declaring Priyanka deserving for the National Award .
It is worth pondering that this film has been nominated for the category of Hindi language of the Oscar Award .
In this context , Priyanka said that whatever film she has done in her filmy career , among those this film is the most important to her .
In this film she has played the role of an autistic character .
This film brought tears in the eyes of many socialites .
Priyanka said that Barfi is the story of the labor of the love .
Such films are produced less .
He is happy that he has been the important part of this film .
About asking the National Award , Priyanks said that she does not work in the film for awards .
If her work would touch the heart of the people , then it is a kind of an award for her .
In the film of Sudhir Mishra ` Mehrunisa ` once again a hit pair of Amitabh Bachchan and Rishi Kapoor will be seen .
The news is that these two will play the character of such friends , who don ` t talk with each other for 25 years .
Both had worked last time in the film ` Ajooba ` , which was made in the direction of Shashi Kapoor .
There is hope of starting of the shooting of Mehrunisa from the next month .
This is the magic of the film producer Sudhir Mishra itself , that after 22 years people will get to see the magic of the pair of Big B and Rishi Kapoor .
Sudhir says that , I had wanted Amitabh and Rishi in my film .
I had stuck on these two names because without them this film was not possible .
In the film beside Amitabh and Rishi the favorite actress of Sudhir Mishra Chitrangda Sen is also there .
One close person of Sudhir Mishra said that in this film Amitabh and Rishi will be sighted flirting with Chitrangda .
Among these two , one would be Hindu and one Muslim .
Both love one girl , because of this the conflict occurs between them and both do not talk to each other for 25 years .
After 25 years , both will be seen to facing each other .
It is said that Sudhir Mishra became successful to make Amitabh and Rishi work together because it is a different kind of the story .
Amitabh Bachchan and Rishi Kapoor have worked together before Ajooba in the films like ` Amar Akbar Anthony ` , ` Kabhi-Kabhi ` , ` Naseeb ` , ` Dosti-Dushmani ` and ` Kulie ` .
Priyanka Chopra is very busy during these days .
She is giving her important time to singing .
Recently she has stepped in the field of the music , then it is obvious to give special attention toward this , but it does not have meaning that she has put the fullstop on the films .
It is the speculation of the people about Priyanka that perhaps she does not have films , thus she is trying to indulge in the singing , but it is not like this .
Priyanka has four films .
In my bag I have Krish 2 , which will be released next year on the occasion of Diwali .
Work has started on Janzeer also .
After this I will go to Las Angels to promote my song .
Next year will start to work on Milan Talkies and Gunday .
Priyanka is very happy with this thing that audience accept her as a good actress .
She says , I want to give every year at lest one film , in that the artist inside me may come out .
While selecting the films I try to balance properly between commercial and offbeat films .
The British director of Indian origin Atul Malhotra wants to make the evergreen hit film of the Bollywood Amar Akbar Anthony again .
This time the title will be Amar , Akbar And Tony .
The original of Manoranjan Desai had been proved such a milestone that already its two remake have been made in Telugu and Malyalam .
The script of the film was emotional also with the comic .
In this , brotherhood and unity among the different religion had been presented beautifully .
Atul will take in this film Indian and British actors both .
Like in the original film the Hindu , Muslim and Christian characters were there , in this characters of Hindu , Sikh and Muslim religion would be there .
Now will have to see that , how would be the British version of this film which was full of comedy and drama .
From three years any film of Aish did not come .
His last released film was Gujarish , in that she was with Hrithik Roshan .
After being a mother , she has not signed any film .
But her closed ones has to say that she could not stop to say yes to the remake of Masum .
Due to the daughter Aradhya , Aish has not signed this film .
Shekhar Kapoor ` s Masoom which came in 1983 is said as the favorite film of her .
It was the first film of Shekhar Kapoor .
In the Masoom of Shekhar Kapoor , Nasuruddin Shah and Sabana Ajmi had played the role of husband-wife , in that role Himesh wants to see Aishwarya Rai and her husband Abhishek Bachchan .
Bedbrat Pen will do the direction of this film .
It is remembered to me that before a decade on Durdarshan in a program ` Subah Savere ` Vipin Handa used to evaluate the film and often used to be very cruel .
Film producer did not like this and started to make pressure .
Handa was advised to be soften again and again and eventually after some time he stopped reviewing .
We all are aware of this thing that not just in the film industry , but a huge difference has come in the role of the media industry .
This change can be viewed in many forms .
At first , in the whirlwind of more popularity means TRP it started to present entertainment in the name of news and in the name of entertainment cheap things .
Instead of maintaining its independent position , the media have befriended with the film industry .
Now it becomes the partner of the film and advertise aggressively keeping readers and viewers in the dark .
The condition of the film journalists has become very pathetic .
The impact of the releation deterioration with the film star or any big producer could be over his job , hence he never does such news from that anyone will be upset .
See picking up the history , in the last ten-twenty years just one-two news would get to see which stag the film industry and the media institutions which had shown this , they had to pay what cost against this even this is not the hidden thing .
The taste of the audiences of the Cinema would be better only when the conscience of good and bad will develop in them .
