What could have you done?
If your desire is a maid, is a slave, then will have to recite forever like this.
Had you asked me from almighty for this that I get the life and you become its master, breath is mine and possession over my heart is yours.
Salim! Are you opposing mighty for a girl?
No, for her who will be the reputation of Mughals in my reign and will be the queen of Hindustan.
Not at all! Proud Mughals ` prestige is not shallow that it becomes equal with a nutshell girl.
Our Hindustan is not something like your heart that a bugger will be its queen.
Then even my heart is not Hindustan, on which you will rule.
I don ` t have any right over your heart but certainly I have right over you , after all you are my son.
Yes , I am your son , but you should think a bit while torturing me that I am not a stranger or slave but your dear one.
No Salim! No, you are reward of my worship of years, the wealth of my whole life, my dear son.
The Diety! The sculptor is present here.
Sculptor! I am very happy after knowing it that even artists like you are settled in my kingdom.
But the fact is this that I am ruined in your kingdom.
Now you would not be.
I believe in the beauty of your skill and offer you rewards and wealth.
FOr the beauty of skill reward is too much, but for the fact of skill it is too less.
Then what do you want?
I want to spread the fact of my skill in every corner of the kingdom.
You have permission.
Sculptor! By refusing the command of king Akbar you have given the proof of the kind of bravery and truth, for that I am grateful to you.
King became grateful, it is not the reward of my truth.
Then, what do you want?
I want to see the hidden fate of Anarkali in your truth.
Did queen forget today that this ritual has been performed by her hand always.
The Mighty! She tells that she is helpless , she cannot give a sword for the killing of the Sahab-E-Alam.
Old ritual cannot be changed, I will take sword just from her hand.
The days are witnesses that I always have got the sword to kill the rebellious from your hand, even today this ritual will be performed by your hand.
To kill my son itself you are asking for sword from me the Mighty!
I am asking sword for that rebellion not for your son, who has announced to wipe off vermilion from your head.
Will you not give me a sword for my security, but victory.
Nothing is my victory Mighty!
I will have loss from both of the sides.
On one side my husband is there and the other side my son.
King, master is coming.
Has king arrived to forgive the mistake of a rebellion?
This hapless the world call him king, has come to cajole his sulked son.
Has come to ask love from him.
After ruining the love of your son do you want love?
King came here as a father.
Kings don ` t cry Sheku!
There are tears in the father ` s eyes.
Shekhu! This poor father, King is helpless because of his principals.
Salim is from his love.
Shekhu! Love could win the hearts, not the army.
After winning the war from the battle field the mighty is coming into the palace of Jodhabai.
Is this marriage symbol, stain over a mother ` s body?
Look, this sword, there is even not a single drop of Salim ` s blood over it.
In the world you might be a first sword to which a mother has embraced.
Let me meet with Salim.
You cannot meet her.
The father ` s sword has pitied but a justice of the king is still overdue.
All these accusations could be taken back, yours all stupidity, disobedience could be forgiven and once again I could be kind to you, if you return Anarakali.
So that you could sentence her to death.
Then the heartless king must sentence to those pined disobedient insects in his reign who fell for lamps.
Wasp hovering over flower should also be prisoned who sings the melodious tune of love.
That playing water of the river should be stopped also which loses its identity in the embrace of the ocean.
This court does not want to hear the seethed argument of madness emotion of love, wants Anarkali.
And I don ` t want to give Anarakali.
Then I take the oath of the Jar-O-Jallal of Tamur ` s clan, you will be relinquished from the crown forever.
This is acceptable to me, but that throne is not acceptable, base of which is kept on the bier of Anarkali.
Congratulations of the life of Shahab-E-Alam to the Almighty.
And to you my death.
Take away this beautiful storm, this colorful gamine and put her alive into the wall.
Avouchment of the king ` s son shine always.
The life of my master ` s should be longer than moon-stars.
I got everything.
Anarkali! This is tradition that last wish of a perdon who is going to die is fulfilled , if there is any wish then tell in front of the mighty.
The wish of the maid is not under the right of the king.
Limitation of our pity is not that narrow, in that even wish of a maid cannot be swallowed, explain.
Before morning you will have to make Salim smell this flower with the drug of faintness so that he will not be destroyed by your death, he will forget you.
And our guard will kill by uplifting you from the side of unconscious lover.
Death became closer to love.
This will happen.
If this will not happen then Salim will not let you die and I will not let you live Anarkali.
The maid has died long back.
Now give permission to bier to go.
You may go.
For king ` s incalculable tip this maid forgives Jalaaluddin Mohammad Akbar for her murder.
Why did you do so?
These beautiful hands, perhaps left the hem of love at last.
Could they become unfaithful to me.
Come near to me and tell, could you cheat me?
No Prince, no.
Anarakali could cheat with her life, not with you.
With life? Who is he who wants to part you from your life?
No one.
Has this consciousness been snatched that you will be parted from me.
This is the justice of fate.
On the oath of this whatever you will asked from Akabar once in the life will be fulfilled.
King! King! Where are you King?
Ill-mannered! What do you want?
My daughter ` s life.
It seems riffle has made you blind, don ` t you know my justice and rule?
Recognize souvenir give by you King!
You had promised me that ask for whatever you wish from Akbar once in your life, today I ask from you life of Anarakali.
I don ` t remember anything.
Don ` t remember? But King who loves justice never reverts from his promise.
I said, I don ` t remember anything.
You could forget your promise but the King ` s king who made you king, he never forgets his poor devotee.
On the day of judgement my hand would be in his court and your collar.
Ask, what do you want to demand?
The king who cannot fulfill his words, what else will he give?
Please pity.
This canal will take you away from the Mughal kingdom.
And this secret that Anarakali is alive, you will have to keep secret so that Salim will understand for the whole life that his Anarakali has died.
This will happen, by giving life to her king has given life to his justice.
Anarakali! Bow down to touch the feet.
And like this my beloved king Jalaluddin Mohammad Akbar has relieved the life of Anarakali.
And in front of the world took the stain of oppression and mercilessness on his character.
I am the remembrance of justice of that king, to whom people remember by the name ` Mughla-E-Aazam ` .
From here, entering into a film-studio.
Have no idea, in this studio how many movies have been made, is being made and will be made but this studio did not change, and its surrounding does not change even.
Only pictures are changed and movie makers are changed.
There was a time when even he used to make pictures here.
Yes, what were you saying?
Just it taht Kanta doesn ` t like the role of Paro.
I meant, make the character bit loud.
You will have to change according to character, character will not change for you.
I will not work in this movie.
Do one thing, close me in the zoo of this place so that your friends will see your Daddy Jee till fulfillment.
Pammi! You also come.
You cannot meet Pammi, this is the order of her mother.
But this is my daughter also.
But you are not her guardian , mother put her in our school , we cannot violate the order of mother.
You are looking restless after looking at me here.
In this house complete care of culture is taken.
Meet Reeta, Suresh! New member of our family.
Actually , I have come to meet another member , to your daughter.
Tell to youngest Mem Sahab that his Sahab salute her.
I am coming from Dehradun.
According to your order I was not allowed to meet Pammi there.
Chota Mem Sahab tells, she will not meet Sahab.
How is the weather of Bombay, Suresh?
I did not come from eight hundred mile to tell you the weather forecast.
I need to decide something about Pammi with you people.
You wasted time uselessly, in this matter whatever we had to decide, we have done it years back.
Years back your daughter left my home by her wish but now why are you people snatching Pammi forcefully.
You forget this Suresh that Pammi has been living with us with her mother for years.
That is because a small baby always needs a mother but now my daughter will stay with me.
Then hear my last word even, no one could separate Pammi from me.
It is useless to ask my name , I will eat today ` s dinner in the hostel itself.
I don ` t have any interest in watching movies.
But why are you explaining all these things to me.
It is so because I have heard this about today ` s gentalmen , if they came to meet with a girl in lonely then at first number ` hello ` , at second number ` talk about weather ` , at third number ` to ask the name ` , at fourth ` to invite for dinner or picture ` .
Enough, enough, then I am not a complete gentleman.
Don ` t scare, I can ` t go ahead from the second number.
In this company is there any film director Mr. Sinha.
Yes, this is a coat, there is coat in this.
Yes , in rainy weather , I mean had not you gave me this in Delhi , under that banyan tree?
Oh , yes , yes , have you come here to give me back this coat?
Yes, no, I had come to Bombay in search of the job.
Your card and address was found in your coat then I here...
Ok, ok, I take the shot, then talk to you.
Similar simplisity, similar innocency, you are Paro in real.
Yes, my name is Shanti.
To her you had given the warm coat, Paro would be someone else.
Heroine of Devdaas is Paro, the role which I want to give you.
But you saw, your friend has disqualified me.
It is good if you will forgive me, I would not be able to do acting.
In whatever condition I am, I am good.
In which condition? I mean what do you do?
It is a huge job, in Modern Chemist I get ninety rupees, just ten less in hundred.
Do you know what will you get to work in our company?
One thousand, ten fold of hundreds.
Now will you do acting?
No, no, what will a lonely girl do with this huge amount of money?
I have a remotely maternal uncle, he always lived far from me, I brought up in an orphanage.
Shanti! How much I am coming to know you that much I am being sure that you will the awesome Paro.
Do you have this much faith in me?
It is weird thing that today first time in life I have trust over someone more than me.
Rakesh! Meet with your new heroine.
He is a tall socialite.
Not very tall, just five feet eight inches.
I mean Mr. Rakesh is a billionaire.
No, no, not pati, I hate from the name of Pati, you see, want to die unmarried.
Where did you stay in Bombay, with Suresh?
No, in halt, since I came out from Delhi, live with freedom.
What the hell I listen, tomorrow is your shooting, you will have to be Paro, a simple Hindustani girl.
I will shoot a hell with this wild creeper over your head, It will not improve till ten days.
Do you think perhaps that you have made a very beautiful face?
At this moment you look like female monkey, female monkey.
You have destructed a good innocent face.
Before coming under someone instigation you would have asked me that how much attraction had in your simplicity.
And what else? Am I kidding?
I had heard that crow copies the swan, but have seen first time that swan copies the crow.
It is perfect, how did you untangle these so fast?
I was untangling for the whole night.
Whole night? Did not you sleep then.
No , you had told me that I am more interested in party than work.
Last night did I scold you much?
Don ` t know why did I scold you this much?
I never scolded any other actress like this before.
I have got irritated over them but never dared to scold.
Any gentleman cannot scold strange women.
What happened? What did you say that I will not come?
It is surprising, on such a situation if someone Sinha Sahab ` s own could be with him then...
Anyway, as such a nurse will be with him for twenty four hours.
Nurse! Call me once Sinha Sahab becomes conscious.
Shanti! Shanti! Shall I drop you at home.
No thanks , I have called the taxi.
You people go, I will go.
I don ` t like to be dependent on someone but these eyes have.....
At this moment no one is there except you who could take care of me.
That day it was raining also and that helpless girl did not have coat even.
Nurse! How is Shanti? She was also with me in that accident?
I am still with you.
Are you completely fine?
I am completely fine, take this water.
How did you know that I was thirsty?
It has been more than thirteen hours for you without drinking water and I know that you have habit to drink water after every two hours.
It has been late night Shanti, tell the driver to drop you at the home.
I don ` t want, you get troubled because of me.
Praise of your daddy is written in this magazine.
Famous director Suresh Sinha has selected a new actress for him.
It is said that this girl used to sell medicine and now is treating the heart of Mr. Sinha.
Hope that Mr. Sinha will take complete benefit of her knowledge of every kind of medicines.
These are all lies, my daddy is not like this.
You always have been staying apart from your daddy, then how will you know how is your daddy?
Shanti! No one has arrived in the studio yet, how did you come so early?
You too came so early.
This is my habit that one and half hour before from shooting....
I know it.
Ok, and what else do you know about me?
Perhaps that ` s why after that night you did not come to know about my wellness.
You had forbidden itself.
I had told you to go, had not forbidden to come to the next day.
Then had you wished that I would have come?
How shameful thing Papa! Suresh doesn ` t have a care of reputation of our family.
He is extraneous blood but now son of this family is even going towards film.
You answer first, how did you reach to cheap filmwalas.
Son of Sir B.B. Verma went to a cheap filmwala and even that in a trivial taxi?
What would they think about us?
They don ` t think about us at all.
Don ` t persuade me, I know you don ` t have affection with me.
You are the enemy of mother, then how could you love her daughter?
You are the daughter of your daddy also and daughter! I don ` t have any enmity with your mother.
You lie , you are snatching my father with my mother but I will not let it do , understood.
You misunderstood it , Pammi! They live seperately long before my coming.
Then I was young that ` s why , now I have become mature , if I will try then they could be united but till you are in between , they will not be united ever.
I say , you have misunderstood.
Then why have you hung this huge picture of daddy here? Tell.
I told you , I am not a kid now, I understand everything.
You understand nothing, if your parents are living apart then it is not mine but your mother ` s fault.
Who are you to talk rubbish about my mother?
After getting disgrace during whole years first time in the life I have got little happiness , it is not a complete happiness but it is everything for me , in any condition I cannot lose it , in any condition.
I was trying their home should unite but you will not let do so.
How will you know , what is it to spend a life like orphan though you have parents?
Did you understand why had I run away from school?
For your daddy , right?
But how did you come to know?
The call of your grandfather had come up.
Daddy! Will you send me soon?
Let your grandfather thin down with anxiety, till then I will drive my daughter in Bombay and will show also premier of my new picture.
Premier? Then Daddy, will your new heroine will also come there?
I know it very well that intelligent girl like you can not say no to fame and wealth like this.
I have decided , now I will not work in movies.
Why? Why? You have lost your mind.
In the film line it has boomed on your name and you are destroying your bright future knowingly, destroyed.
Just my own, not of someone else.
Let others go to hell, every intelligent person looks at his own benefit.
See, I am not your enemy.
I will not work now.
How will you not do? Don ` t forget that you have contracted with me for seven years.
I will claim over you in court, claim.
Do whatever you wish to do, but you cannot force me.
Shanti is going to leave Mumbai, Pammi.
Was it telephone of Shanti?
But why are you perplexing?
When had you met Shanti?
Don ` t lie to me , yesterday you had taken some promise from her in the theater and today she is leaving behind work , home , everything , was this the promise?
What would I also have done Daddy, rubbish things are published in the newspapers about both of you, people scandalizes you, friends taunt me in school.
If you had any problem with your daddy then you would have told me, what is your right to do wrong with an innocent girl.
Daddy! First time in the life you scolded me.
A man can run away from everything but not from his fate.
I had known that you have brought Pammi here by cajoling her.
No thank you, I don ` t have time, I want to take Pammi from here immediately.
You cannot take her.
Suresh! I say, it would not be a good result to clash with Sir B.B. Verma.
This is the opinion of the court that age of Parmila is not that much that she could understand her wrong-right hence Court have to decide this that to stay with whom is good for her , with mother or father?
Mister Sinha! Will you be able to bring up your daughter all alone?
How? In the course of shooting and editing you have to stay in the studio for whole night then who will take care of your daughter?
When for outdoor shooting you have to stay out for more than two months even though you will live Pammi with the responsibility of servants.
For the sake of your daughter why not both of you make peace?
Court remorse that Parents of Pramila could not make peace hence taking care of Parmila ` s benefit court has reached in this decision that responsibility of her care will be given to the mother.
I was thinking that if a boy purpose for marriage to a girl, then how that girl does feel.
I could answer this after being a girl itself.
Your last movie has failed also, Suresh!
Yes, I have heard this news even before.
I have not called you here to tell this news , but to tell you result of this news.
I know you have lost five-seven lakhs.
You don ` t worry, you will earn even more than this from my next movie.
We will certainly earn, I have done complete arrangement for this.
There is no need of your choice, whatever script will be given to you, you will have to shoot that.
You would not be able to change a word, a single word.
Your interference would not be there in songs, music, in anything.
You cannot make a picture by insulting me like this.
If you will arrange everything by your own then even make picture by someone else.
I have arranged that also in fact you did not remain capable to make my movies.
What did you say? Did I not remain capable to make movie.
You have earned lakhs from my movies, now I did not remain capable to make a movie.
This is film line Suresh, just for you alone I cannot torture five hundred people of the company.
Now perhaps you will not be able to make a successful movie.
Yes, situation of the auction was supposed to come.
Till when it would not have come, it has been passed two years after firing from the job.
During these two years to get the job God knows he tried how much but could not get the job.
And how he would have got, in the film world if a person fell once then he keeps on falling.
No one asks , not those who watch the work , and not even those who give the work.
People who watch have forgotten him and people who give the job are forgetting him.
This is the tradition of film line , even though it takes quite long to get name and fame , but it does not take much time to wash out the trace even.
Today my second horse won also, it is a very lucky day for me.
For me also, I won the case against Shanti, after the two years.
Shanti will have to come back to work.
Shanti will not come to work.
But she has lost the case.
Days back when I was in Delhi, came to know that Shuresh ` s house was auctioned, did not you go for bidding?
Will Shanti still come in our company?
I teach children here.
From where are you coming?
Bombay, Season of race finished just now.
Got to meet him, came to know that you have lost the case, that ` s why will you have to go to work again?
It ` s my opinion, you have not come here for hunting, not even to talk about horse then why don ` t you open out?
Film line has even thrown away Suresh aside.
If you will come back to work then Seth Jee is ready to give direction work to Suresh.
Seth Jee has called me back finally.
It is my opinion, I used to think wrong about Seth Jee, he is not a bad hearted.
I am happy, finally he felt my need.
The picture you will direct, heroine of that will be Shanti Devi.
That person has become the enemy of himself, till how long you and I could help him?
The doors of this company are always open for him.
You have come back, you will see even he will certainly come back a day.
Did you like my new flat?
Everything is here, roof to save from sun and rain, a floor to sleep, are you standing? Wait, wait?
Take this, sofa of a complete new design, any socialite of the city will not have this.
Do you still knit the sweater?
This was the last sweater but now will start to knit again.
This is not a poison, it is wine, it is last of hope for those who have an old habit to be intoxicated.
Bug of fame and success, bug of wealth and love, when all these bugs go away then people recline to this.
Seth Jee is making a huge movie, for that he needs you.
We always have understood each other, so don ` t decline, I know just to place me you came back.
Why will I come just for you?
Who are you mine?
Just now you said it right , bug of name and wealth is very powerful , only for these things I have come back , not for you.
If you are a good artist Shanti then even I am not a bad director.
That ` s why I came to you, I know how good I could work in your direction, cannot in someone else direction.
This is my only interest to come back to your company and nothing more than this.
Thanks, after a long someone appreciated my direction.
This is a moment of happiness Shanti, let me drink.
Why do you stop me? Who am I yours?
Anwar! Where is daddy? Do you have some clue of his whereabouts?
No, No, I have not seen him for many days.
You might have heard something about him, I had come to take him.
Baby had come to take you Sahab, her wedding is going to take place.
You have come to me to take what, I have lost everything, everything.
Oh yes , I had bought your daddy ` s house , if you wish then that too....
No, I have just come to ask the address of my daddy.
His address? What was his address yesterday, that is not today; what is today, that will not be tomorrow.
When he does not know his own address, then how could I....
Even though tell something, where did you meet him last time, when did you meet?
Except past memories, now nothing remembers.
Baba! they come here wondering for whom every path of the world have been closed.
Have you also wandered from your path Baba?
Who have sat on the chair of director?
Just after putting off the hall ` s light, surrounding becomes silent.
Sounds of cracking of wafers and chewing of popcorns stop.
The eyes of everyone rolled down to the screen.
This screen is called silver screen or screen of silver because it is white like silver.
Now magic play starts.
This magic will be of running pictures, of running cars, of the actor who fights with dozens of villans, of the dancing actress and of comedians who laugh and make everybody laugh.
Rhythm in everything, magic in everything.
You know it already that these images or pictures are thrown to screen by the rays of the light.
These light rays could be seen in the dark Cinema theater.
After that you start to fly sitting on the magical carpet.
You reached to the place far from your city or village , you did not see that before.
These things are appeared to you till amazement of magic remains in the dark hall.
Magic breaks that time when images vanish from the screen and bulbs light up in the hall.
You might be wandering looking at the magic of these moving images.
How does all this happen?
Who does perform this?
In other words , you will be curious to know that how a movie is made.
The magician who visualizes images moving is Science.
In fact images does not move.
It seems moving or appears moving.
A long link of stable and static pictures are shown on colourful or black-white screen.
Main images are just bigger than stamp tickets, but while showing on screen these are made hundred times larger.
Rays coming out of the room of the cinema operator throw these images on the screen.
Whatever is the theory behind the magic of the movies, you might have seen those before.
Sitting in front of lamp or lantern you must have seen the shadows on wall lifting your hand or curling fingers.
While putting the hand near to light these shadows become large.
Believe or don ` t believe, beginning of Cinema has started from this play of children itself.
You must have seen at your home to your younger brother or sister making kinkey pictures of houses, tree-plants, cat, rat by chalk or colourful pencils.
This child does what, Walt Disney has done that for entertainment of millions-billions children.
He made the greatest cartoon movie and created the character like Mickey Mouse.
You could say studio to the drama stage where movies are created and characters play their role.
Cameraman tells you to see up-down so that perfect light will fall on your face.
Director of the movie or cameraman also does the same thing.
You must have read comic books in those story is told in twenty or twenty four continuous pictures.
Like this story of cinema is told in many sequences, scenes, shots or frames.
You must have seen such flip books on every pages of those it seems that similar pictures have been made.
But looking minutely it comes to know that in these pictures little difference is made every time.
When you open the pages of the book quickly then these pictures become live.
Now long sequences of pictures does not remain, but pictures seem moving.
As a theory your hands do the same work that time which work is done by Cinema projector.
It throws picture on the screen one by one with the same speed (with the speed of 24 images or frames per second) because of that it seems that the characters shown in the images are moving.
A film-camera is a simple camera resemble to your box camera.
It takes twenty four snaps in a second.
Long reel of the film starts to open and frame starts to expose one by one.
When the film gets ready then it is played on the projector with the speed from which speed these pictures are taken, means speed of twenty frames per second.
Every frame or image is brought in front of a powerful group of rays.
It is stopped there for a moment.
Then the shutter closes and the next picture is brought in front.
But how quickly all these happen that looking at the projector it seems that the film is running consistently like a thread of reel moves on the sewing machine.
The principal which works while turning the pages of the flip book, the same principal works here.
If you will know that how the film is made then you could get more pleasure from movies.
But before making a film its story, script, etc. have to write, writer and director have to do the imagination of the whole movie in their mind.
Cinema is machine dependent but the machine does that which is wished by humans.
you must have heard stories which starts like this from your mother, aunt or grandmother.
Cinema is a new way of telling a story from that, story could be narrated to thousands people simultaneously.
But initially a person has to think a story.
That person is called story writer.
He writes the story or its idea means think about its concept.
Story or idea could be his own or could be taken from any book or published story or drama or could be taken from any foreign movie.
He puts his story or idea in front of producer or director of a film.
If they agree on the story then it is given to the screen writer.
The director himself could write the screen or a writer also can write who has experience of writing many movies.
He gives an expansion to the story and divide it in scenes and sequences which are shown on screen.
After that he takes suggestions from the director and prepares the screen.
Screen is written like a drama itself but in this the demands of the screen are taken care.
When the director (or producer-director both) pass the screen the it is given to the script writer.
Often screen has to write in English because producer , director , cameraman , person who records , actor or actress , who will be from the different regions , could understand the screen written in English.
Despite that script writer has an important place initially in India from the initial voiced films (in that, dramas played on the stage are filmed).
In most of the Indian films songs are assumed mandatory, that ` s why position of lyricist and music director is also important.
Before shooting the song and dance shot lyricist has to write the songs and musician has to create the tune.
After happening all these works film director starts to shoot the scene.
This work is done in the studio also and even outside the studio at any house or other place.
After entering inside the security gate of studio initially it seems to us that everything is laying haphazardly.
Junior artists are also there to whom some time insulting name of Extra was given.
But these artists are not extra or useless.
They are indispensable to make the film attractive, to make the surrounding natural and to bring the zeal in the crowd scenes.
Art-director, who plan the sets of studio and under whose guidance these sets are prepared, his assistants and labors who put the things in the proper place are genie of the magical lamp.
They can prepare the palace in a day and another day could demolish it.
They could make the palace of rich and hut of a poor in overnight.
You must have seen often big hall of many pillars and you must have thought that how much time and money it takes to prepare such sets.
You could see here that these palatial pillars are made of the plywoods and are shallow from inside.
On these marbled papers are stuck.
By Putting clothes over the wood , on the big architrave (which are called flats) walls are made and huge doors which seems like Sagwan made are actually made by plywoods.
Red of the sun set and beautiful scene of the orange colour which is appeared to you behind the screen, that is made on the background cloth which is placed on the whole wall floor to the roof of the studio.
On the set actor and actress surrounded by many small-big lights appears to act for any scene.
You could recognize the director , chief cameraman and his assistants and assistants of sound engineers.
Sound engineer sits outside in his recording booth.
The microphone is there in his hand which fixes in the end of a long stale finger (Which is called boom as well).
This Boom is fitted on a tripod which could be moved to and fro.
A tripod is kept near the actor who speaks but is always outside the area of the camera.
Above the Boom, above the walls of set wooden narrow platforms are there which hangs down from the roof with the help of strong ropes.
These are called ` Catbox ` .
In this huge electric bulbs are fitted which put the light on set from different angels.
Active and careful people who do the work of on-of or up-down of the lights according to the order of the cameraman or his assistants are called Light Coolie.
These people who are called coolie do very important works.
Beauty of shining scenes and lighting stars depends on the right accumulation of lights, work to set those and put up and down is done by these poor people.
The work of makeups in films is tougher than makeups of school dramas.
But the theory is similar.
The main difference between both is that in the drama actors have to be ready till the act ends, they have to be on the stage till the curtain falls.
In films Actor or actor has to be ready till the only a part of the scene which is called Shot.
This single shot may need to take again and again in that camera keeps on running and expensive colour reels expenses.
Here, in this magical world one more magic appears.
This magic is of the makeup.
This makeup is the wonder of artists who polishes that face from the paint powders etc.
Actually with the help of some makeups, some with the good use of light and with the photography, physical lacks of actors are hidden and their good things are set off.
This is the reason people who work in the studio does not get influenced by the stars ` beauty because they know that this beauty has been made by the people like them.
Eventually cinema is that which is made by human.
The whole shooting of the film is not done in the studio.
A few scenes have to shoot in the natural environment.
Now-a-days many producers of low budget movies like to shoot the scenes of the studios also in the bungalows, flats and offices.
Like this they save the expenditure of set making and rent of the studio.
Dialogues recorded in these outside sets have to be dubbed or have to record again.
Big producers who shoot in studios and producers who shoot outside in flats or bungalow, both have to shoot many scenes outside in natural light.
Now most of the producers to give natural colour to their movies takes their actors and their technicians with all of their stuff to Kashmir and Kullu, Nainital and Masuri Utkamand and Kunnur and sometime other side of Himalaya Afganistaan , Nepal.
A truck which is called Sound Truck, camera, small tape recorder, playback machine to record the sound, camera trolly and reflectors have loaded on it.
Reflectors are big and small wooden board on which silver papers are wrapped.
It is used to reflect the sunlight on the actors at the moment when they are in shadow or enough light is not falling over them.
Outdoor shootings will seem picnic to you but this is not picnic for employees who carry those reflectors and for actors on their face strong sunlight is thrown by the reflector.
Actually it takes years for these actors to become used to of these reflectors and to control their tears.
Everyone knows this and say that to shoot outside morning ` s mild sunlight is best.
Later sunlight becomes staunch and it becomes ` Top Light ` .
Due to this dark circle comes below the eyes of actors and actresses for that painful reflectors are used.
But very few people become successful to start the work before ten or eleven O ` clock.
It takes time even to rehears the dialogues.
Outdoor shootings are just not for the scenes of the singing-dancing , this is also good for emotional dramatic scenes like the scene of the stimulating fight on the boat or steamer by the sea shore or in the sea or scene of the picnic.
But you have known already that outdoor shooting is not a picnic.
Outside the wall of studio the discrimination of low-high demolishes.
Beautiful actor and actress, great directors and eligible cameraman mix and mingle with other members of group.
With the luggage these sound trucks are also rented for the local outdoor shooting and also to shoot in the far places like Kashmir , Assam , Meghalaya, Unti.
One month they have been boiling in the heat of Rajasthan ` s desert and another month they shiver in the icy slope of Kufri or Gulmarg.
They certainly go to the beautiful places and see the stars in different moods.
If any person of them write a book on this subject then how interesting it would be.
Initially , in India , films were advertised saying it that this is the sensational film which has voice and song from beginning to end.
That time there was demand of actors and actresses who film drama and music and could sing own.
For the film actor eligibility of singing was more important than the eligibility of acting or good looking.
Later , after the few years system of ` playback singing ` was innovated and because of this a revolution came in the film making.
Making of voiced films were done with the combination of principals of photography and recording.
In beginning while showing the silent movie orchestra of few instruments used to play and the audience who could not read the title on the screen for them a person used to explain with the scenes simultaneously.
Sometimes that person used to speak those dialogues also which were supposed to deliver by the actors on the silent screen.
After that instead of orchestra gramophone came into use.
Then all the voices of the film, in other words dialogues and songs were played putting them on gramophone record.
Its speed was exactly like the motion of images because of that it used to seem that the characters on screen were speaking in real.
But talky was mnufactured at that time when it satrted to record from sound photography to film.
When prints of the film used to be prepared then sound track used to be imprinted in the left corner of the film reel.
On the set near the actors a microphone is hanged.
This microphone with the help of electric wires connects to the recording studio.
Here with the help of recorder film runs.
Recording voice is recorded through electricity in the corner of the film in the form of wry lines.
Later these wry lines i. e. sound track is copied on the negatives of images.
Like this , that whole print (which is also called Merit Print) prepares, in that images and sounds are also there.
When in Cinema hall film plays on the projector and bright rays of light throws the several times larger images of movies then electric rays pass through the soundtrack and photo activates the electrical cell.
This cell sends electrical waves to the amplifier and magnifier transforms those waves into actual sounds.
Electrical wire takes these sounds to the loudspeaker fitting behind the screen where these sounds are heard to the audiences.
Since sound plays simultaneously with the actions showed in pictures and with the action lip movements hence it appears that characters are talking-laughing and singing.
Now position of black & white pictures have been taken by the colourful pictures mostly and instead of old sound-machine tape recorders are used.
Two negative films of pictures and sounds are distinct.
Earlier actors used to sing songs in front of the camera , like how they speak dialogues.
It was not necessary that good singers will be good actors or good actors will be good singers.
Despite that voice of a singer was not always good for the recording.
From the innovation of playback singing all these conditions were changed.
Meaning of playback singing is that at first songs are recorded with all the musical instruments without any insufficiency.
Later it is played on the set or in the place of outdoor shoot and actors do the acting of singing moving their lips.
Whereas now for playback singing singers of higher quality could be found hence it did not remain necessary that actors and actresses must sing well.
For actors and actresses it was not necessary to be a good singer.
Playback singing released Indian films from those singer-actors most of them were not actors, and hence new generation of actors came in front.
Such playback singers were less in number who could sing popular songs for film audiences.
Film producers started to run for them.
A time came when all actresses started to sing in the voice of the Lata Mangeshkar and Asha Bhonsle and all the actors in the voice of the Mohammad Rafi and Kishore Kumar.
One more change occurred in the field of film sound Which could be called the opposite of playback singing.
Outdoor shooting and soundproof studio of the abroad became popular then a problem stood in front of those who records.
Many drawback used to remain in outdoor shootings.
Even sometimes the sound of portable camera (which are not the soundproof) disturbs the sound of actors.
These disturbing noises could not be passed through the main sound track.
But later success was achieved to make a new soundtrack by time accomodation which is generally called ` Dabbing ` .
In this, only dialogues of the actors used to be heard.
The film is played in the projection room of the studio.
Every movie is not played for dubbing.
Like this if an actor does not have good voice, then could be changed by dubbing from another voice.
Like this a movie made in a language could be dubbed in another language.
But for this , dialogues have to be translated like this that those will match from the motion of the lips.
` Awara ` movie has been dubbed in Russian language like this.
In this, it was not just that Rajkapoor, Nargish and Late Prithwiraj Kapoor were looked like speaking in Russian but even voice of the dubbing actors were similar to original actors.
The magic of cinema is a thing not just to watch, a thing to listen even.
Fake sounds are heard from the mouth of the famous but unable to sing film actors.
You watch distinctly any single shot or a picture or sound track then any meaning will not come out from that.
Editor mixes all in a manner that from that concept thought by the director or writer come up.
Editor integrates every scene to every shot, establish tuning of dialogues and sounds with mute pictures.
There after the film gets the tranche of art and it becomes interesting for audiences.
Otherwise it will become the puzzle of useless sounds and pictures.
When songs or dances are filmed then an editor or his assistance itself establishes the tuning of physical activities (like lip movement, hand movement) with earlier recorded song or music.
Like this he gives you a thrilling experience to see your favorite star singing or dancing.
Although director does the last decision of the film good or bad , interesting or boring , but if he will not get the witty support of the editor then he could not make the film anyhow.
When the film runs in proper motion then reason behind this is that the editor knows this from his knowledge and long experience that which scene or shot should be how long and short.
He saves the film by editing its useless and boring part from his scissors.
Like how doctor saves a man from his knife.
Sometimes the director is called the captain of the ship.
This is right even because the whole film is his creation.
He knows like a captain of a ship that he is moving toward which direction.
If he will be assumed as a captain then editor will have to be assumed as a chief engineer because ship runs with the speed from which speed chief engineer runs it.
Without him ship will deviate from its path.
He runs the film in the direction , which direction is decided by the director with the help of the writer.
This is the reason that some famous directors of India and abroad edit their films by their own or keep closer contact with the editor.
As the new techniques of the film direction are being popular, work of editor is becoming tough and tricky.
In the new manner of direction and editing many changes have to be done in the manner and techniques.
Now writers and directors are not satisfied by just this thing that story is narrated simply in a proper sequence.
They don ` t want to film just the actions of their characters but also want to film their thoughts and their imaginations.
They show the previous incidents by flashback and speculate about the coming incidents by flash forward.
Editor or editor-director has to use his knowledge and experience and also imagination simultaneously.
New films are coming near to the technique which is called ` Montaz ` .
This technique had been used first by Russian director Seregei-I-sensteen to show some special effects in his film.
In the techniques named ` Montaz ` to emerge the poem , drama or another literally meaning shots or images which appear distinct from each other are kept in a special sequence.
The best example of the ` Montaaz ` is the first two shots of the famous film of the Charlie Champlin ` s ` Morden Times ` .
Sometimes in Indian movies symbols are used , That is even a kind of ` Montaaz ` , like blowing out of a lamp at the moment of the death of the any character is a very good and intelligent example for ` Montaaz ` .
To show white kite flying in the sky just after the death of a poor poet who sells kites for his subsistence.
White kite moving toward the sky is the symbol of the poet ` s soul.
This is the very simple but effective metaphor of the cinema.
Every person who comes to Bombay wants to go to the film studio and wants to see the song recording.
In Bombay there are five or six sound recording theaters which are supposed as the best theaters in India.
Often producers from Madras and Calcutta come here to record songs of their films, especially Hindi songs.
Almost hundred musicians with their music instruments (Among those from flute to piano many small and big instruments are there) present in the hall.
In front of the everyone a stand is there in that there is a musical script written in the western music method.
Four or five microphones are kept at different angles near the different groups of instruments so that their sound waves could be caught properly.
Generally this combination of Indian and western music is not bad.
This has given us some very famous film songs.
Looking at the popularity of western lifestyle, western outfits and western pop musics, this harmony is logical.
In this there is a reflection of our new life style and mood.
Few music directors use only the Indian musical instruments and select their tunes only from the Indian classical music.
Many famous music directors like the mixed form of Indian and western music and in these few gets less and few gets more success.
More famous and popular music directors use the whole army of instrument players to record their songs because this is the trademark of their success and symbol of their influence.
In front of the hall two sound proof rooms are there.
One is for singer or singers.
All microphones are connected with the recording machine in another room.
Here recorder with his assistants sits with many switches and buttons.
They decrease-increase the sounds coming from different microphones.
It takes few hours for instrument players to practice music for a song so that harmony could be established between the rhythm of singer and rhythm of the instruments.
When recorder and music director (Who sitting with recorder hears carefully the sound of song coming from loudspeaker) both gets satisfied then actual recording starts.
Its rare that first take is assumed perfect.
Generally after taking four, five or six takes any one take is announced as an ok take.
When songs are printed on sound films and film is developed then its one copy is prepared for playback singing for the shooting in studio or outside studio places like Kullu-Kashmir etc.
After taking its one more copy it is send to gramophone companies to make the record.
In most of the Indian films popular music is there.
Few films are made as an experiment.
There are no songs in those.
But this is exceptional.
Generally the songs are certainly kept for the popularity of the film.
But the music of the film does not complete just from the songs.
When film is shot then to break the monotony of mute images and to give the dramatic impact to important scenes playback music has to be given.
This work is also done in the recording theater.
When playback music is recorded (this is more important for the film without songs) then the film becomes ready to be recorded again.
Now cameraman has filmed the all scenes of the film.
Sound recorder has recorded the dialogues of every actor.
Dialogues, sound effect and background songs are recorded in the three tracks of sound film.
But for the last copy of the film only one sound track has to be printed on the film reel.
The process which is used for this that is called mixing or re-recording.
In this, two, three, four or more than that sound tracks are mixed and copied on one sound track.
At first every reel of the sound track is adjusted with related image reels.
Then all sound tracks altogether is played in a song with pictures through a special projector and the sound recorder turning switches and buttons in his room manage the rhythm between them.
The sound increases by turning button in a direction and by turning other side it converts into the wishper.
Director keeps his eyes on every work of film making.
He decides this that in re-recording what should be the quantity of different elements.
When the work of the re-recording is done then mixed voices, sounds and musics remain on the single track which is called ` Re-recording Sound track ` .
Now this and negative film of the images are printed together and like this a complete voiced film becomes ready.
The work of the last stage of the re-recording is like to beautify a bride.
Now this bride of the married print is ready to go in front of the audiences.
Now , for you the film is no more a magic full of mysteries.
This is the thing made by scientific technologies which gives the realization that pictures are moving and speaking.
Making of the film is through a mechanical process.
In the film a story is told through the medium of cinema for that black & white or colourful pictures and sounds are used.
Pictures and sounds are photographed and recorded separately and then both are mixed in a fixed sequence by director and editor.
Like a story, drama, novel or poem film is also a mode of expression.
The film is a new form of the art.
In this many arts combine, like acting, drawing, sculpting, architecture and music.
But its tough and tricky process separates it from other arts.
In its creation, hundreds of men work with dozens of machines for months or years.
For this there is need of many precious machines also, like camera, recording instruments, editing film and projector to run the cinema.
It has to spend a lot on their photography film and recording film.
There is need of a huge amount of money for all these things.
The price of one thousand foot colour negative was almost rupees 1600 (in year 1976).
This runs for 11 minutes in the camera.
Reel of one thousand foot sound-film to record the sounds, dialogues and music comes in rupees 400.
For a film there is need of almost one thousand reels.
This is the reason that cinema is called most expensive art.
The fact is this that how much amount of money is used in film making that it has shifted in the hand of wealthy people.
Instead of art it has become a business.
Saying of famous Francis writer and film director is that film will become art in real sense when the camera will be cheaper like a fountain pen and film like paper.
A huge amount of the money is spent for the publicity of the film through the medium of radio, newspapers and posters.
Expenditure of every item increase due to the competition among film producers and now it is being planned to make the film of the one Crore budget.
In such films there is less art and more calculation.
Looking at all these things effort to decrease the cost of film making should be welcome.
In India a government organization Film Finance Corporation provides the help of few lakh rupees to the enthusiastic directors and new artist to make the movie at low cost.
By the way many film producers and directors are making low budget films now.
In these few movies are very good.
These are full of the art and entertaining also.
But very few people are aware of these films because these do not come into the commercial cinema theaters.
These movie theaters want just to take the big budget movie with the famous star cast.
For most of the audiences the main attraction of the film is their stars, like beautiful actor-actresses and horrible looking villains.
Looking at their names crowd rush into movie theaters.
If Part of any actor is not written well or film is not directed well then he cannot demonstrate well his talent.
If film is better then watch it two-three time.
Then only you could understand the qualities of direction , acting , dialogue , photography and editing and with benefits you will get more pleasure due to this.
Remember this thing that it is in the hand of the cinema viewers to make a film successful or unsuccessful.
Finally these are the audiences who make the film successful and decide about its technical qualities.
They favor some special kind of films and don ` t watch some kinds of films.
Communication revolution and cheap internet system celebrated 30th anniversary.
Revolutionary communication medium internet which is used by billions of people daily completed thirty years on 1st January 2013.
The internet has changed world ` s billion people ` s lives in the past 30 years.
Computer network had begun its technical revolution officially 30 years ago.
On 1st January 1983, it had taken the position of the whole network system completely.
It is also known as the name of the ` Flag Day ` .
On this day itself security division of America started the Arpanet Network which connected to the use of the Internet Suit Communication sysem.
Later from this path of the World Wide Web (WWW) was paved.
Arpanet Network based on the design of the Wale ` s scientist Donald Davis has started to work as army project during late years of the decade of the 1960.
Many institutes like California University And Standford Research Institute helped its development process.
In 1973, work started on IPS and Transmission Control Protocol Technology.
This was prepared because the old Network Control Program (NCP) had drawbacks.
Computer scientist Tim Burners-Lee from Britain used internet protocol in hypertext documents later in 1989, which is known as World Wide Web.
From the reference of the electronics editor of the magazine ` Engineering and Technology ` Kris Adwerd ` Daily Telegraph ` has written that meaning of the internet is that worldwide you can connect to anyone from anywhere easily.
That even in very cheap price.
Today is birthday of film producer and actor Kamal R. Khan who is always in gossip due to his extravaganza.
It is weird habit that he always keeps targeting someone.
Sometime he wants to marry with Sunny Leon and other time wants to be the Priminister of India.
Recently he had firmly targeted actress and porn star Sunny Leon and had talked vulgar also.
Kamal Rashid Khan means R.K. who calls himself a star is in the limelight again.
Kamal Rashid khan who participated in ` Big Boss season-3 ` does not wish to watch the ` Jism-2 ` a film by director Puja Bhutt.
After getting hurt from the torture over Biharis in Mumbai Kamal Rashid Khan made the film named Deshdroh in that he made the Maharashtriyan learn a lesson in his style and taught the lesson of integrity and describe himself indeed Bihar superior.
This film did not get the success on the box office.
After that targeting Bollywood stars, Kamal Rashid Khan started to comment in his style because of that he started to be talked much in media.
Looking at this popularity of him last year he was not selected for Season-4 of the ` Bigg Boss ` .
Kamal Rashid Khan who made films in the Bhojpuri language after Hindi, now-a-days mocking everyone on the twitter.
Bangui jumping is played by a person all alone.
In this game a person jumps toward down from more than hundred feet.
A rope is tied around his waist and other side of the rope is tied on the place from where he jumps.
Player jumps the moment, the rope tied around his waist also falls down with him.
When rope goes down completely then due to the the force came inside it, it comes up and go down again.
Consequences of this up-down remains till power of the rope lasts and player keeps dwelling with it.
This name to Bangui jumping was got from elastic rope which is used generally to tie up the luggage.
First jump of Bangui jumping was made on 1st April 1979 by four members of Dangerous Sports Club from the 250 feet high Clifftown Suspension Bridge of Bristol because such jumps were illegal during those days , hence those four members were arrested by police.
After coming out from the police imprisonment even they continued their jumping and started to show it professionally to the people.
They attract the people by jumping from many high places like the Golden gate of America, Royal George Bridge, mobile Cane Hot air balloon and many more high places and advertised worldwide this new game.
Professionally this game of Bungee jumping was started in 1986.
A person named Edge Haiket from Newsland had made the first jump of the Bangui jumping from the Greentaith Bridge in Auckland under the professional process.
Edge Haiket presented Bangui jumping as an exciting game in front of the people.
Edge Haiket jumped from many high-rise buildings and places and put everyone in wonder.
Edge Haiket had also made a jump from the world famous Eiffel Tower.
Initially plastic ropes made in the factory were used.
Later, tradition of hand knitted ropes started.
Despite that knitted rope provides a better grip to hold by hand.
For the rescue work mobile cranes becomes very helpful in accidents occurring during Bangui jumping.
From that, it could be taken help easily in up-down, left-right rescue work.
Most of the accidents occur due to the excessive length of the rope.
The person who jumps ties up one head of the rope to the jumping place and other head ties up with his ankle.
The head of the rope which is tied up in the ankle, is tied up with the help of a hook.
Generally this hook is made of steel which gets close after taking ankle in between in that, the person who jumps becomes satisfied from the security perspective.
The most high professional Bangui jumping yet was made from Macau Tower of the China from 223 meter.
It took 4 to 5 seconds to make this jump.
The record of the jump made by most aged man yet is in the name of Mohan Keet whose age was 96 years.
He plunged from the African Blaucroos bridge which has a height of 216 meters but he jumped till 160 meters.
He had said that he made this jump to get the thrill and to get rid of fear.
If they had to give job to people who have recommendation then why do these office people call us?
Bharat! Nothing will happen by standing silently taking the degree in the hands.
It has been told to you that evacuate the lands, and remove your huts from here.
Master! The government gave orders to remove huts many times, but where we will take this after removing from here, government never told this.
We don ` t know all these things.
This is the land of the Seth Jee and Seth Jee wants to build the orphanage here.
God! Take away the grief of my Bharat, make him give job God!
Sleep mother and let the God sleep also.
Today did you go to a big office?
Tomorrow I will have to go to one more big office mother!
I had shown your horoscope to an astrologer.
Are Saturn-Comet still in their places?
He was telling that everything will be right in one-two months.
Mother! My stars, my horoscope is this degree, and in its how many Saturn, how many Comets are there, nobody knows this.
Bharat! When will our days change?
When I will get the job.
When will that day come?
Bharat! I tell the truth, four years back when you had got this degree of engineering, since then I am watching this dream that you will get any good job.
Then we will not have to stand up in bus queue, we will have a car, will have a beautiful huge house.
The cupboard will be filled with the colorful clothes, I will wear best ornaments and then we will fly in the sky sitting in the airplane.
You come also, let ` s get wet in rain.
Oh! My clothes will be wet.
Sheetal! After a half hour I have to reach for an interview , who knows after years fate of this degree will be brightened up and I will get the job.
Vijay! Today is the last day to submit fees of mine and Champa, if it will not be submitted then we will be deregistered.
Just name will be deregistered, you will not lose the face.
Vijay brother! There is strike in your collage that ` s why you don ` t have any tension.
Why I will have tension, when our educated useless elder brother takes the tension of our education.
He does not, used to do, I am tired of trying, now no more arrangements could be done by me.
Brother! If it cannot be arranged then what will we do?
Quit the study.
When you used to ask for money for fees then had I ever told that from where I will bring the money?
Now I am sick, a heart patient, who knows when my eyes will be closed.
If I cannot do anything for them, then you also gave away.
Father! You misunderstood me.
I understand everything, but even you understand that the degree you are wondering uselessly with putting in your pocket, over that every single penny has been spent by my pocket.
This is my debt over you and you have to pay off this debt , by insuring degree to these three.
Degree? Split this degree and you give away to these three.
Did you all hear ` what does your elder brother say?
Radha! You go tomorrow itself and tell to would be father-in-law of Champa, that according to his order we cannot not educate Champa till B.A.
You became late by five minutes Sahaba, just now Sheetal left.
Brother, today I have come to meet you.
First and last time for an essential work.
Work with me? What is the work?
Will you not tell to anyone, not even to Sheetal?
Brother, I need some money.
I don ` t have right now Bharat, but do one thing you go to your home I come right now.
But how much money do you want?
Minimum three hundred.
Bharat! Take this three hundred.
It is good that my college is closed, otherwise I had to arrange five hundred instead of three hundred.
Bharat! Which kind of collage is this of Vijay which remains closed generally?
Now-a-days boys don ` t have tension of schools, colleges, during our time scools and collages used to be assumed as temples.
At that time students used to know that here education is finished there job is ensured.
But today ` s students are in the dark , they don ` t know that even after getting big degrees they will get job or not.
Brother has told how bitter and fact thing, today no one understands this.
Despite that all say pointing the finger that students have lost their mind , they don ` t have discipline.
Father do you remember last year incident , when my friend passed his exam after years ` dedication and when he went to take the degree getting dolled up to the hall wearing gown then tore up the degree just after getting it.
How hurt he would be?
Then what has gone off him? The loss must have been of his parents or brothers, who must have submitted his fees ignoring their basic needs.
Parents must have invested twenty-twenty five thousand in his education, but his twenty-twenty five years passed.
And the cost of twenty-twenty five years of adolescence is not twenty-twenty five thousand rupees.
What did happen to him?
This is just not his voice father, this is the voice of youths wandering in the dark.
Door of fate opens when it is tried to be open Vijay.
Take this five thousand, on the oath of Purani Delhi if you will complete the work you will get the twenty five thousand.
Is this India Gate?
It is looking quite different today.
Earlier nothing was here, now this gun and cap?
Brother! You may say it ` unknown soldier ` .
Unknown Soldier? I didn ` t understand.
Brother! This lamp burns in the memory of those who became martyr while saving the country.
And did you fall for money?
Brother! How could I think about that country which cannot even give a job to my brother.
Vijay! there is no pain even if you die, but if you live, then live like a good citizen.
After that day Vijay left home.
He left a letter on my name, it was written - Brother! If ever in life I will be a deserving person to show my face to you then I will come , otherwise you understand that your strayed brother lost in the dark.
Months passed, he didn ` t come, not even his news.
Condition of the father became unstable and Mother? Mother became tired crying.
And I could not say anything to anyone that why did Vijay leave the home?
It became four years, on my birthdays you just say that happy birthday, you never gave any present, never gave a gift.
Sheetal! I think this every year that if I will get a job then at least I will give you a golden ring if I would not be able to give you a diamond ring on your birthday.
But our fate is like this that didn ` t get the job, if got much then got a program to sing in the television or got some small tuition.
Let it go, give your hand, birthday gift this ring of stainless steel, did you like it?
Did not like the gift?
When I like you, then I like your every like.
Sheetal! Do you know why have I brought the ring with the picture of the God.
Someone should be the witness of our this relation , and who will be a better witness than God?
Bharat! From tomorrow onward I am the secretary of the Mister Sohan owner of the Mohan and Company, salary is seven hundred fifty rupees only.
Did you see the miracle of your this ring.
Yes Bharat, really this ring did the miracle , our whole life changed.
Sheetal! Congratulation for the job, let ` s go now it is time to program.
Bharat! Today we will sing such a song that the world will remember , don ` t forget that.
Mohan Saahab! Last year you paid twenty lakh tax , and then to pay the advance tax you took the money on interest.
And this year after paying twenty two lakhs taxes to pay the advance tax you will have to take the money again on interest.
This is the law of this country and we have to follow it.
Mohan Sahab, today if you are earning hundred rupees then in your share it comes hardly three or four rupees , the rest goes in tax.
But the money paid in tax must have been used by someone somewhere , what do you say?
Pardon me Sir, today if you earn then pay the tax also.
God never does this, but tomorrow if you cannot work then will government give you to eat?
A gentleman has said this, don ` t think this that what does the country give to you, think this that what could you give to the country?
And till we all don ` t think this nothing could happen to us.
Miss Sheetal! It is five o ` clock you may go to home.
Billionaire businessman Nekiram is in my hand, there is need of a hint and job is conform.
During childhood mother used to make drink holy water of Ganges but now needs of life have stewed like this that morning starts with liquor and night sets off with liquor.
I am not a cheap song which is sung on every brothel.
Sheetal! I had never thought in my dream even that so important thing will be decided so quickly.
This became the matter of quick engagement and fast wedding.
Let ` s go Sheetal, tell this news to mother after reaching home.
Oh! I have asked a hundred times for sorry , and you are the one who doesn ` t speak at all.
Ok don ` t speak, I speak, because I am very happy, very happy, ask why?
Did something happen of the quick engagement and fast marriage.
Exactly, yesterday things became right, today it became certain to go to America, is not this a good news?
Sheetal! Do you want a huge house to live in?
Sheetal! A company is making a huge building, I have got a job there.
When that building will be prepared, then tell to Mohan Sahab to buy it.
Oh ho! Then you did not forgive me for not to come on yesterday.
How huge is the office, that huge is the work.
I remembered, even I have to do huge works, I have to go to the passport office.
Sheetal went to America with Mohan Babu, I started to feel that she is going away from my life gradually.
Tulshi! Cannot you see?
Babu! It is seen but what to do? Whenever my dust falls it falls over you.
Tulshi! You will have to bring some groceries.
Baba , today he didn ` t suffer from fever , then why is he crying?
I don ` t understand anything daughter.
I knew it Babu, you were following me yesterday.
But Babu, you are the first man who has taken the pain to ask this question.
Babu! Even in Ramayana of the Tulshidas there is Ram also and there is Sita also , but in Ramayana of this Tulshi there is no Rama , there is no Sita , only Ravana is there.
That ` s why I tell you that what will you do after knowing it, just know this that my son ` s fathers are - food, cloth and house.
Babu! I tell you the truth, if that day someone like you would have come then there was a Rama in the Ramayana of this Tulsi also.
Tulsi! There are toys in this for your son.
Babu! I had thought that you will think about my life whole night and you will not like to talk to me even but you did wonder.
Babu! I saw many people , knew too many people , the world run away from those whose life is stained and I? Babu my life is just not a disgrace it is embarrassement.
Tulsi! My labor friend, people say that when eclipse is there then in whatever thing you put two leaves of basils, it doesn ` t get affected by the eclipse.
Tulsi! Tulsi saves others from eclipse , how will she be a victim of the eclipse?
Baba, our that Babu is very good.
Yea daughter, he is very good, he praises you, he gives you day off also.
He brought toys for Munna also , but you don ` t deserve that you will start to think much about someone.
Don ` t know what sin is hidden behind his sympathy?
Baba! If that day Jaggu ` s men really would have knifed then what would have happend to Babu?
He could have died.
Then the man who become ready to die for someone, how there can be sin behind his sympathy?
You tell the right daughter, but Babu is high class person, we don ` t have proper shelter even.
Seth Jee tells that the Government has thought to put the shilling on the property, that ` s why for now work of making the building is stopped.
All of you come tomorrow and take your clearance.
If you will not give me money then I will have to recover the price of my son from somewhere else, I need to buy a son-in-law.
But son-in-law could be got from the marriage of the daughter.
Used to get, now he is bought, and you will have to also buy the son-in-law.
I am helpless even, but considering the old relation I give you time so that you could not say later that Ramachand changed from his word.
Why wait for eight and ten days, you listen now itself.
Great son , this became the thing , if someone have brother like you then how it could happen that just for twenty thousands rupees sister ` s engagement will be broken.
Father! Who cannot pay off the credit of the man provision store , who have not paid the rent of this house for two years , from where will he give him twenty thousand rupees?
Ramchand! Bharat is silly, ignore his words, give me time for eight-ten days.
Why do you spoil your sleep for eight-ten days, tell him today itself that auction off his son and earn twenty thousand rupees.
It it will be in the destiny of Champa then she will get a better guy than Prakash.
Not better than Prakash, now she cannot get Prakash even.
Don ` t say this, pity over me Ramchand.
How fondly my father had accepted this relation, how happy was he that Champa is going to the Ramchand ` s house.
I will do anything, I will give you twenty thousand rupees, I give you word Ramchand.
I am very happy, sister, but what is this you didn ` t inform me about your coming, it is okay but no letter no mail to Bharat.
I did not feel need of it.
Brother Bharat! Your father ` s condition is very bad, he has been taken to hospital.
Mister Bharat! If you bring these injections and medicines then it is possible that we may save him.
What is the matter Tulsi , you woke me up in this late night?
What is the matter Bharat?
Munim Jee I need some money?
It is not about the clearance, Munim Jee, I am in a trouble, my father is very sick.
Give a little help, I will be grateful for whole life.
Swear of the God! Bharat, if I would have had something then I would not have delayed to help you out.
It is not the matter of two-five rupees Tulsi, it is the matter of two-five hundred rupees.
Last hope was with Muneem Jee, even he refused.
Babu! You stay here, I will come just now.
Babu! You have swear of those toys you had brought for my son, wait for me.
These are your medicines and this is your bill, five hundred twenty five rupees.
But I have only twenty five rupees.
Then take the medicine of twenty five rupees, brother, why did you waste my time?
See, my father is very sick.
Don ` t take me wrong, I am educated, with a degree, you keep this degree with you and give me medicines.
Tomorrow I will take this degree back paying all the credits.
I know you have come with the real face and real helplessness, but I am helpless because this shop is not mine.
Bharat! Just thieving has been remained to do.
How is father?
Your bail will be done tomorrow morning and then the case will be finished also.
Father pined in illness and stubborn son keeps on wandering uselessly with a degree in his pocket.
And father, during his last breaths when he came to know that his son was caught while thieving then he passed away.
It is better not having a son than a son like him.
People are telling fact Father, and even you used to tell right, this degree a debt of you over me.
I did not pay it off and will not be able to pay off, you take your debt back, father.
The man who tore and burnt the last hope of the job, nothing could happen to him in the life.
Sir! This notice, I am being fired from the job, why is it so?
The one who is fit for office is kept in the office.
Sheetal! I am the owner of the office where you do your work, don ` t say yes for the marriage under this pressure.
Marriage is the deal of life and life is not that cheap thing which will be sold out on the cost of the job.
It is not a matter even though if your mind doesn ` t allow, your reputation will be more in the office,
Oh! It is a simple thing, in which ocean of the thought you sunk off?
Sir! The person who searches small joys, if in front of her stocks of happiness open up then she cannot believe it.
Sir, this is my good luck that you thought of me deserving this.
Sheetal! What did you do?
Bharat is poor that ` s why you left her company.
Tomorrow if someone richer than Mohan Babu will come then will you leave the company of Mohan Babu also?
Brother! I am your sister and someone should not be jealous of his sister ` s happiness.
I burnt or didn ` t burn , this I don ` t know , but you incinerated Bharat.
Brother, a person who was caught stealing, he keeps running whole life.
You left companionship of years in minutes.
Now what, except poverty what else the problem is there in Bharat?
Brother! You became of the poverty after being among the walls of poverty.
I have seen the world with Mohan Babu, and now first time in life got the chance to be alive.
This should have happened long ago, brother! Go, you have to go to the house of the Mohan Babu.
No Bharat, I will not go.
Brother, you are the elder brother of Sheetal and the elder brother is like a father, you have my oath brother, go.
Bharat, you also go to the home, I will adjust some other program in place of you.
No Sikandar no, I know that this world will laugh that even father ` s funeral pyre did not cool down and son has started to sing.
But this world doesn ` t know that I don ` t have a single penny to complete the rituals or the last rite of that father.
I will sing, will get some money, some fire of needs will set down.
Son! Except a ring every ritual of the engagement completed.
Take this, make it wear to Sheetal.
Champa! Why this lamp is not flaming?
Didn ` t give the electricity bill , electricians came and cut the connection.
Bharat! Ramchand Jee has sent the letter , read it what is written?
Would be father-in-law of the Champa has written that if money is not given to him in a month then it will not be his fault.
Damn to such relation, he didn ` t ashamed while writing such letter.
Did you see, brother! Champa will not go to the collage and even I don ` t have to take the degree.
We will run our house by working hard.
Deepak! Till I was just a son in this house, even I used to revolt like you, now don ` t do.
Deepak! It is you who told me that the last words of the father were this that if the relation of Champa will be broken, then his soul will not rest in peace.
He didn ` t get when he was live, after death he should get.
Brother! Till now you bear all the burden on your shoulder, not now.
Idiot! These have this much strength that I could give the examination fee to you for your degree.
These shoulders have this much strength that I could arrange Champa ` s marriage.
Everything will be exactly how father used to wish.
Mother! I have to meet with some one for work, I will just go and come back.
Seth Jee! Any work, any work in that I could get twenty thousand rupees for my sister ` s marriage in a month, could get the examination fees for my brother, I am ready to do that work.
Now your days will change suddenly, you will be rich in very less time.
If the government will come to know that you and other mates giving pain to the public to finish the government take money from other countries.
Swear of the old as well as New Delhi, execution is certain.
Scared? The heart of those who have captured the food ` cloths and shelter is like the heart of the rat.
If it will be my wish then I will not delay for a moment even in the marriage.
But It is mother ` s saying that there is no auspicious date for the marriage for the few months , and I cannot refuse my mother ` s saying.
Mother ` s would be daughter-in-law stay in a small house, I cannot tolerate this.
Before marriage we will stay together, society cannot tolerate this, that ` s why I have taken this home, till marriage you, your brother, your sister-in-law will stay in this house.
Come, come Deepak, you became inspector, your stubbornness has been completed.
It is not about stubbornity, Brother.
Deepak, when we have everything then what is the need to do this job?
Brother, we have insulted degree and degree has insulted us, and today when my degree is giving us value then we should also give it value.
Oh Tulsi, this money is for Munna.
Tulsi! Now your labor friend is in such condition that he could arrange a house to live for her labor friend and good clothes to wear and good bread to eat.
I will come tomorrow and will take you people away from this colony.
Let ` s go Harnaam Singh, leave it till the car.
I come also.
No Tulshi, You go back with Baba, it will be painful for him to come.
Mother! This is Tulsi, my labor friend, from today onward she will stay in this home itself.
Oh Mohan Babu! Welcome, welcome, the heart becomes very happy meeting an intelligent person like you.
God should do, every businessman become honest like you.
Come, I will make you meet with friends.
Perhaps I have seen you before.
Yes, yes, you must have met at some party, you could not remember, he could not remember also.
Not at the party, you must have seen him on TV.
Yes TV, now remembered, it was the night of our engagement, I was very happy and you made the happiness larger singing a song full of sadness, is not it Sheetal?
Mohan Babu! To sing a sad song on the occasion of happiness is an inauspicious thing.
I am ashamed for that.
Sheetal, you are standing like a statue, did you forget your old friends? You did not recognize me not even to Bharat.
Oh! Then you both know each other, it is old friendship.
Yes Mohan Sahab, Sheetal has sung many songs on TV, what a fantastic pair were she and Bharat.
When we will get a better chance like this, Sheetal is here and Bharat is also here.
Then shall it do , it has been years to listen song of these two.
Listen, you sung it very good, I liked it very much.
Today is 15th August.
Today is the speech of the priminister over the Lalkila, I never missed it.
Bharat! Today you are not in need of the food , cloth and shelter then the speech of the Priminister started to reach to your ears.
You want that hidden grains should been taken out.
Seth Jee, even years back there were need of the food, cloths and shelter to the men.
But then their needs used to be fulfilled, just because then there were no businessmen like Nekirams who used to hide the grains.
Men who hide the grains, come out and see the crowd in the groccerry shops.
To reduce the crowd from groccerry shops is not our duty, it is the duty of the government.
Bharat! If you will try to go against of us then loss will not be ours.
The plane paper with your signature which is with Nekiram could take you till execution.
Inspector Deepak! Special Branch has sent this paper signed by your brother to us.
No, warant on the name of Bharat? What do you say?
These papers are evidence that godowns which you raided, those were your brother ` s.
My Bharat , cannot do wrong work ever.
