The biggest drawback of इस योजना is that इस सब्सिडी is not एक बड़ी खामी up with महंगाई दर . 
दिल्ली is an urban territory . 
There banks are in बैंक बहुतायत and most of अधिकांश लोगों पास also have bank accounts . 
यही बात can also be said about आधार कार्ड भी . 
But various complaints are आ रही हैं up in other territories of देश . 
The most important सबसे जरूरी बात is that the needy will only मिलेगा , पैसा if their fingerprint matches the database of UIDAI . 
Now , let us look at the ground reality . 
The reality of कोटकासिम तहसील of अलवर जिले is before us . 
In the four districts of झारखंड भी also - हजारीबाग and सरायकेला पायलट परियोजना was शुरू since last December . 
In Ramgarh , the laborers of मनरेगा were supposed to get मजदूरी on आधार of आधार कार्ड . 
There are one lakh , seventy four thousand मजदूर but even after एक साल बाद भी only five thousand मजदूर have been successfully linked with aadhar card . 
Despite this if केंद्र सरकार is in जल्दबाजी to come up with कैश सब्सिडी योजना , this means that इसके wants to take चुनावी लाभ of elections . 
If it thinks that it can again come into power because of मनरेगा , then why cant योजना make the trio of यूपीए . 
Congress is busy in playing the tactics so that भाजपा शासित राज्य should not take its advantage . 
Actually during मनरेगा योजना दौरान , the chief ministers of भाजपा शासित राज्यों put up their pictures in the MANREGA posters . 
Despite the efforts of कांग्रेस , in जल्दबाजी कैश सब्सिडी योजना will definitely होगा a wastage . 
The 65 rupees increase in न्यूनतम समर्थन मूल्य of गेहूं by केंद्र सरकार is said to be नाकाफी by किसान संगठनों . 
संगठनों कहना that with this इससे will हो जाएगा , difficult for किसानों to get the disbursement on उपज , consequently they will have to face भारी नुकसान . 
Seeing बंपर स्टॉक सरकार has मंजूरी to निर्यात भी 25 lakh tonnes of 25 लाख टन गेहूं . 
If एमएसपी is not increased then in the coming years the farmers might कम उपज of किसान गेहूं . 
वीएम सिंह संयोजक of राष्ट्रीय किसान मजदूर संगठन said that सरकार has mocked at किसानों साथ by 65 rupees increase in एमएसपी of गेहूं . 
किसानों will not even नहीं मिलेगी back their disbursement at these rates . 
सुधीर पवार of farmer awareness forum says that there will होगी an increase of at least 100 rupees per quintal but with an increase of just 65 rupees they have cheated किसानों . 
In झालरापाटन समीप and वानिकी कॉलेज near उद्यानिकी on गुरुवार वार्षिक सेमिनार on तीन दिवसीय अखिल भारतीय शुष्क क्षेत्रीय फल समन्वित अनुसंधान परियोजना of dry regions शुरू . 
इसका is being jointly organized by कॉलेज and केंद्रीय शुष्क बागवानी संस्थान of Bikaner . 
In इस सेमिनार there will होगा मंथन primarily on अनुसंधान ही of फलों . 
On पहले दिन of the conference six research papers were प्रस्तुत in the first three sessions . 
According to राष्ट्रपति प्रणब मुखर्जी , विकास of कृषि and क्षेत्रों are मूल आधार of सर्वांगीण प्रगति of the country . 
उन्होंने expects to लक्ष्य the target of 4 percent increase in विकास in 12 वीं योजना in कृषि क्षेत्र . 
मुखर्जी was मंगलवार here after पुरस्कृत the cereal producing खाद्दान्न उत्पादक राज्यों for शानदार प्रदर्शन . 
Amongst राज्यों receiving कृषि कर्मण पुरस्कार for the best farming , मध्य प्रदेश got कृषि कर्मण पुरस्कार for बेहतर प्रदर्शन in खाद्दान्न उत्पादन . 
बिहार मिला प्रथम पुरस्कार for शानदार उपलब्धि in पैदावार and पैदावार of धान . 
हरियाणा got the '' Krishi Karman '' कृषि कर्मण पुरस्कार for शानदार प्रदर्शन in पैदावार and पैदावार of गेहूं . 
After घमासान बाद within सरकार भीतर regarding न्यूनतम समर्थन मूल्य -LRB- ( एमएसपी ) -RRB- of गेहूं , finally इसकी was declared on बुधवार . 
समर्थन मूल्य for चालू रबी सीज़न will होगा , 1350 rupees which is 65 rupees more than पिछले साल . 
In बैठक , खाद्य मंत्रालय प्रस्ताव भी of निर्यात of extra 25 lakh 25 लाख टन अतिरिक्त गेहूं has been approved . 
This has been यह अनुमति looking at भारी स्टॉक of गेहूं . 
Even before this निर्यात of 20 lakh tonnes of 20 लाख टन गेहूं was approved . 
Actually , वित्त and खाद्य मंत्रालय नहीं थे in पक्ष of increasing समर्थन मूल्य of गेहूं . 
While खाद्य मंत्रालय is anxious for भंडारण , खाद्य मंत्रालय is anxious for वृद्धि in खाद्य सब्सिडी . 
For the year 2013 केंद्र सरकार might increase मूल्य of wheat upto 100 rupees . 
पिछले वर्ष एमएसपी of गेहूं was set to हो सकता है 1,285 rupees , which can have an increase of 100 rupees पिछले वर्ष . 
मंत्रिमंडल can also be लिया जा सकता है on निर्यात भी of extra 25 lakh tonnes of 25 लाख टन अतिरिक्‍त गेहूं in मंत्रिमंडल . 
There has been मतभेद within सरकार बीच regarding न्यूनतम समर्थन मूल्य of गेहूं . 
Amongst गेहूं उत्पादक states sowing is vigorous these days but the farmers are in dilemma as समर्थन मूल्य has not been घोषणा . 
More than half गेहूं has been sown in उत्तर प्रदेश and पंजाब . 
The rate of गेहूं in विश्‍व बाजार is good now while सरकारी गोदामों have stocked गेहूं than the requirement . 
It is उम्मीद that निर्यात of domestic fruits will पार स्तर of four hundred crores in चालू वित्त वर्ष दौरान . 
निर्यातकों कहना that there can हो सकती है feeble increase in मात्रात्मक निर्यात while कारोबार is expected to हो सकती है quite good in terms of कीमत . 
Till 2006-07 निर्यात of Indian flowers in वैश्‍विक बाजार रहा best . 
This year flowers worth around 653 crore rupees were निर्यात . 
While अगले ही वर्ष निर्यात was घटकर to 340 crore rupees . 
Since then till the last पिछले वित्त वर्ष निर्यात is not stable . 
निर्यात in पिछले वित्त वर्ष था 365 crore rupees . 
नकवी says that there are possibilities of निर्यात at वैश्‍विक स्तर . 
सरकार is thinking of increasing आयात शुल्क on raw sugar . 
This can be फैसला in a few weeks . 
सरकार will soon लेगी decisions in सिफारिशों भी of चीनी उद्योग of रंगराजन समिति . 
सरकार will step ahead in phases in दिशा of making नियंत्रण free . 
On मांग for increasing आयात शुल्क on उद्योग जगत ओर , उन्होंने कहा that विचार विमर्श are going on with वित्त मंत्रालय साथ and very soon कोई फैसला will be taken on the issue . 
For उत्पादन of चीनी in देश उन्होंने considers योगदान of cooperative sugar industries to be significant . 
Not consuming the hereditary संशोधित खाद्य पदार्थों will depend on the wish of उपभोक्ता . 
It will होगा essential for the GM food producing companies to देना जानकारी regarding the GM food on the packets . 
पिछ्ले वर्ष सरकार had made कानून regarding this . 
One of एक वरिष्ठ अधिकारी of मंत्रालय of consumer affairs said that in पैकिंग कानून हो गया है has हो गया है necessary to देना विस्तृत जानकारी of a food packet . 
इसके includes वजन , मूल्य , , तिथि and तिथि of the product . 
There are नए प्रावधान of पैकिंग ( वजन ) in इस कानून . 
यह has been एक नवंबर 2012 from 1st November , 2012 . 
Alongside , सरकार made इसी साथ ही mandatory to लिखना भी जीएम on GM food packs which has been enforced from 1st January , 2013 . 
With this the the companies have to लिखना जीएम with bold letters on GM packs . 
Because there are प्रतिबंध in बिक्री of खाद्य पदार्थों in foreign . 
Therefore many of कई खाद्य पदार्थ from there are जीएम . 
किस्म , of अनार भी -LRB- सेंदूरी -RRB- which is demanded even in foreign . 
After पहल बाद किसानों भी of Siwana and सिणधरी क्षेत्र have also planted gardens in खेतों and at 172 hectares of 172 हैक्टेयर जमीन आज फलों are laden in the garden . 
When the local peasants who were on गुजरात भ्रमण by कृषि विभाग ओर देखा and knew the about पैदावार of अनार there , they also विचार about इसका . 
Alongside adopted the water droplet irrigation technique with सरकारी अनुदान with which the water loss is nominal . 
अमरूद is फल which is nutritional पौष्टिक तत्व in abundance , despite this होते हैं , is cheaper and easily available . 
According to प्रमाणित रिपोर्ट of National Institute of nutrition , Hyderabad , स्तर of एंटीऑक्सीडेंट्स in अमरूद is much more as compared to दूसरे फलों . 
If आप सोचते that संतरा is full of 5 गुना ज्यादा विटामिन सी c then आप will होता है , amazed to थे that अमरूद contains 5 times more vitamin c as compared to संतरा . 
It has been प्रतिरक्षा our immunity system to fight against long diseases . 
Regular consumption of अमरूद with seeds cures constipation . 
इसे strengthens digestive system if इसे is consumed with काले नमक साथ . 
A plant worth fifty thousand rupees ' , I was surprised for sometime after hearing it . 
Agricultural experts said that it is a ' यह ' बोनसाई ' कि . 
Though it is small to देखने at but wonderful . 
कीमत of पौधा is as much as is its age . 
पौधा has हुए आकर्षण of the flower show -LRB- nursery and landscape expo 2012 -RRB- शुरू at the Indian agricultural research institute . 
More than 100 varieties of colorful indigenous and देसी विदेशी फूल have been kept in फ्लावर एक्सपो . 
लोग were seen to be keen towards बोनसाई and gardening learning methods . 
पौधा नामक फोलियस ब्यूटी is green throughout पूरे साल . 
That is why इसलिए is called evergreen . 
Apart from this even if we तो दें पानी to the desert roses , they तो dry . 
जेपीएस डबास of वरिष्ठ वैज्ञानिक of भारतीय कृषि अनुसंधान संस्थान said that बोनसाई is एक जापानी कला which means कि . 
इसकी began from जापान . 
बोनसाई पौधे are planted in pot , whose branches and roots are regularly trimmed . 
लोग fondly plant बोनसाई in their homes and offices . 
Dr. Praveen Khare told about उपाय to save the cattle from diseases . 
The cold and dry temperate climate of लाहौल स्पीति is considered favorable for सेब उत्पादन because of its disease free atmosphere and geographical location . 
Therefore किसानों of लाहौल स्पीति are continuously getting attracted towards बागवानी ओर . 
किसानों and gardeners of क्षेत्र of पटन घाटी had शुरू पौधों from 1980 . 
Fruits and सब्जियों बहार during सर्दियों . 
So फल and a lot of green vegetables . 
Apart from vitamin C , vitamin B complex , iron , phosphorus Sweet potato is rich in Beta carotene . 
Sweet potato keeps शकरकंद शरीर warm and the consumption of Vitamin C present in इसमें relieves from ब्रांकाइटिस and lung problems . 
इसमें is rich in fiber therefore apart from इसिलिये hunger इसमें is also good for digestive system . 
स्टार्च , , विटामिन , , मिनरल्स and protein are in abundance in sweet potato and होते हैं provides ऊर्जा to शरीर . 
Sweet potato also has पोटेशियम भी in पर्याप्त मात्रा . 
Potassium plays काफी अहम भूमिका in reducing blood pressure . 
केंद्र सरकार has घोषणा to increase न्यूनतम समर्थन मूल्य of गेहूं for चालू रबी सीजन from 65 rupees to 1350 rupees . 
Seeing बंपर स्टॉक the export of 25 lakh tonnes of 25 लाख टन गेहूं has been approved . 
इनपुट कोस्ट the tremendous increase in the input coast किसानों had demanded for at least 200 rupees increase in एमएसपी of गेहूं . 
Against आश्वासन of पवार सरकार has धोखा किसानों by merely an increase of 65 rupees in एमएसपी of गेहूं . 
कृषि वैज्ञानिकों who have successfully डीकोड जीनोम of pigeon pea have now become successful in decoding the genomes of दूसरे महत्वपूर्ण दलहन . 
With this इससे will हो जाएगा easier to make chick peas safe from insects . 
भारतीय कृषि अनुसंधान परिषद has started तैयारी रोग free , high yielding hereditary संशोधित -LRB- GM -RRB- बीजों of अरहर and chick peas . 
पिछले वर्ष ही वैज्ञानिकों had डीकोड जीनोम of chick peas . 
The BT chick peas of दलहनों will be विकसित through घरेलू संसाधनों . 
The state चरण दास महंत said that for हासिल आत्म निर्भरता of दालों बीजों of दालों will be विकसित . 
The extremely advanced बासमती by कृषि वैज्ञानिकों have become जरिया of happiness for 1509 किसानों . 
यह किस्म with उपयोग of सीमित कीटनाशकों and ज़्यादा पैदावार in कम समय is the most advanced यह किस्म of बासमती at घरेलू and स्तर . 
Because of स्वाद , , सुगंध and best बेहतरीन आकार , Pusa basmati 1509 has become पहली पसंद domestic and खरीदारों . 
किसान भी are also getting rich by doing खेती of Pusa 1509 instead of परंपरागत बासमती . 
Along with getting prepared soon नई किस्म is capable of giving ज्यादा पैदावार . 
According to प्रभु the most new varieties जरूरत less use of pesticides . 
Because of आयातित सस्ती चीनी कीमतें are coming down quickly . 
With this the heart beat of चीनी उद्योग has increased . 
But सरकार has completely साफ मना to do anything in this direction because of महंगाई . 
The finance minister वित्तमंत्री his angst on महंगाई कहा that चीनी is not a special issue . 
सरकार is ready to raise हर संभव कदम to reduce कीमतों . 
संगठन are shocked at this statement of चिदंबरम , वित्त मंत्री . 
At present there is 10 % चीनी आयात on चीनी आयात . 
While , कीमत of चीनी has आ गई है down to 500 $ tonne in the world विश्व बाजार . 
Looking at पर्याप्त उत्पादन in Brazil more falloff of sugar prices are expected . 
A total of 8 lakh tonnes of कुल आठ लाख टन चीनी has been आयात till पिछले सप्ताह . 
मूल्य of चीनी in पाकिस्तान भी is also 5-6 rupees less as compared to भारत . 
After this इसके बाद will announce its decision regarding ban on आयात or निर्यात फसले नियंत्रण . 
इस साल चीनी उद्योग has quite a lot चखा मिठास . 
There has been a steep increase in इस उद्योग of इस उद्योग worth 80 thousand crore rupees . 
उद्योग has निर्यात चीनी in large quantities . 
किसान are dependent on चीनी उद्योग . 
During सत्र दौरान उत्पादन of उत्पादन was 2.63 2.63 करोड़ टन . 
दूसरे सबसे बड़े चीनी उत्पादक country of दुनिया , भारत has also निर्यात भी 34 lakh tonnes दूसरे सबसे बड़े चीनी इस साल . 
The beginning of 2012 brought hopes for इस उद्योग . 
In जनवरी , the Prime minister elected विशेषज्ञ समिति in अध्यक्षता of रंगराजन to make sugar control free . 
इस समिति has given सकारात्मक सिफारिशें to चीनी उद्योग in अक्टूबर . 
इनमें includes control नियंत्रित रिलीज प्रणाली and removing debts from लेवी चीनी . 
खाद्य मंत्री केवी थॉमस has assured the representatives of उद्योग to रंगराजन सिफारिशों of रंगराजन . 
कृषि मंत्री शरद पवार has already समर्थन this . 
For हित of उद्योग सरकार had handed over कीमत भी of एथेनॉल to बाजार in नवंबर . 
किसानों भी also मिला फायदा of ऊंची कीमतों of चीनी . 
During इस दौरान they were paid more than 50 thousand crore rupees by the mills . 
तुनकमिजाजी of मानसून during खरीफ सीज़न दौरान has affected फसलों . 
Because of this not only उत्पादकता of अनाज but पैदावार भी is also आशंका to होने प्रभावित . 
But बात to हो सकती है राहत is that यह can हो सकती है भरपाई to काफी हद with रबी फसलों . 
मंत्रालय says that in order to भरपाई अतिरिक्त भूमि and उन्नत बीजों are being इस्तेमाल for रबी फसलों . 
उत्पादन भी of कपास is also expected to कम by 18 lakh bunches . 
सरकार has expressed उम्मीद that व्यक्त in अनाज उत्पादन can हुई compensated with रबी फसलों . 
In खरीफ सीजन सरकार has done the एमएसपी of 15.7 फीसदी , in एमएसपी of धान , 15.7 फीसदी , in कपास , 15.7 फीसदी , in mung bean and मूंग , 15.7 फीसदी , in मूंगफली , more than 33.3 15.7 फीसदी , in soyabean . 
For this खरीद भी of भारतीय खाद्य निगम has also been increased . 
अतिरिक्त गोदामों have been व्यवस्था for अनाज भंडारण . 
मार्ग of नये क्षेत्र नामक उद्भव of कृषि and अनुसंधान has commended . 
Humans did the early attempts of controlling and affecting वनस्पति . 
Before this they get भोजन in प्रत्यक्षतः कुछ मात्रा from plants and वृक्षों directly . 
Early man received कुछ मात्रा of भोजन from wild animals and birds . 
They आरंभ खेती cleaning वनों . 
They debut of वृक्षारोपण and making पशुओं their pets near the surroundings began before 800 BC . 
The relationship between प्रारम्भिक कृषि and स्थिति मध्य is contentious . 
One opinion in इस संबंध is that new grain producing नवीन अन्नोत्पादक अर्थव्यवस्था is फैली in different with directions with शैशव of mixed farming . 
This infancy state थी स्थित in fertile crescent . 
One of एक अर्थव्यवस्था amongst this was found in the step territory of Eurasia . 
There that already turned into cattle grazing and अर्थव्यवस्था . 
The factors of पर्यावरण gave a significant contribution mechanism . 
Thus they gave जन्म to मिश्रित खेती here . 
This procedure is चली since रोमन परंपरा that उद्भव and विकास of खेती happened in this sequence . 
Firstly , शिकार , of wild animals , वन्य फलों and edible -LRB- भोज्य पदार्थों and thirdly cattle grazing . 
But now इसे is rarely स्वीकार . 
Another similar opinion is that कृषि has उत्पत्ति in such big valleys where जल नियंत्रण was जरूरत . 
कुछ वर्ष पहले back बेबिलोन and अन्य रूसी वैज्ञानिकों drove अभियान throughout मध्य विश्व भर between 1916 and 1930 on आधार of which they सूचीबद्ध उत्पत्ति of 8 free centers very significant cultivated plants of मध्य विश्व भर . 
यह सर्वप्रमुख is यह सर्वप्रमुख and largest free विशालतम स्वतन्त्र केन्द्र which consists of the following hilly terrain of चीन . 
Northern - उत्तरी भारत has undoubtedly been the birth place of कटिबंधीय फलों including गन्ना , , चावल , कटिबंधीय फलों and आम and वंशीय पौधों . 
मध्य एशिया - - इसमें includes north western Afghanistan , India , Tajikistan , western Uzbekistan , t yen-shan . 
Remote east - Amongst the 83 enlisted 83 सूचीबद्ध जातियों here were 83 सूचीबद्ध जातियों of गेहूँ and अखरोट and alfalfa . 
Mediterranean center - is गृह of जैतून and many leafy-vegetables . 
इथिओपिया - यह क्षेत्र is very significant because of many varieties of wheat , sorghum , oat,millet-barley . 
Southern Mexico middle America - It was केन्द्र था , of मक्का and कपास where 49 स्थानिक जातियाँ were enlisted . 
Southern America - बल on महत्व of उच्च पर्वतीय क्षेत्र of रूसी अभियान of बोलविया , , Peru , Ecuador . 
In the traction green infancy stage of बीज of कृषि the feudal grain system has tied किसान or workers to the rich . 
कृषि भूमि क्रान्ति था only deeply related to कृषि भूमि क्रान्ति but it था dependent on that . 
In 1709 BC Abraham dubby was doing कार्य of casting लोहे in coal-book dell with सहायता of coke . 
सभी तरह of अनेक सुधार had to be done before casting सभी तरह of लोहे . 
As नयी विधियाँ of लोहे were being adopted , लोहे of कृषि and अन्य उद्योगों started प्राप्त available easily . 
वाष्प was also easily available . 
With this industries and the subsidiary services grew rapidly . 
Consequently माँग of श्रमिकों were also fulfilled . 
Even if श्रमिकों are called from सुदूरवर्ती क्षेत्रों there scarcity will be there . 
As परिणामस्वरूप , , ज्यादा कार्य was done regarding better farming methods . 
Thus arrangements for खेतों and crofts were made . 
Which was बहुत ही आवश्यक शर्त थी for सुधारों . 
महत्वपूर्ण लक्षण of new farming techniques was specialism . 
More and less न्यूनाधिक आवश्यकताओं of भोजन and clothing of किसानों were fulfilled with self sufficiency oriented मूलक कृषि . 
