In the ancient times in spite of agriculture , fish farming , hunting of wild animals and collecting food resources was the main occupation of life rearing .
Wet - hot tropical people are by nature conservative .
Hence they are not willing to relinquish their traditional agriculture and the agricultural practice has been going on for centuries .
Under animal husbandry different types of businesses or agriculture is done , such as the silk business , poultry business , beekeeping , fisheries , sheep and goat rearing , piggery etc . Along with agriculture the above forms of animal husbandry are also reflected .
Animal husbandry play a major role in the economic development of the country .
Because of this lakhs of people of the country receive cheap and nutritious food .
India has enormous potential to meet the growing needs of animals .
55 % of the total number of buffaloes in the world , 20 % of the number of goats and 16 % of the number of livestock is present in India .
Sharp increase in the sector of animal husbandry began from the early years of the decade of 1970 .
The production of milk in the time from 1947 to 1970 stayed almost stable .
Under the Seventh Plan there has been an increase in the production of milk at a rate of 4.5 % .
Per capita availability of milk in 1950-51 was 124 grams per day which increased to 203 grams in 1997-98 .
This advancement in the production of milk has been due to the various livestock development programs implemented by the Centre and the states .
The credit of an increase in milk production goes primarily to Operation Flood programs .
There has been important progress in the field of poultry also during the previous years due to the research and development done by the government and private sector .
There is an important role of sheep - goats in the Indian rural economy .
The contribution of both these is central in the rural economy .
The earnings from the exports of animal husbandry sector and its related products in 1996-97 was Rs 1925 crores .
Among this the export earnings of leather and leather products were Rs 1063 crores .
Looking at the declaration of the prime minister to make India a nation free of starvation in the future ten years animal husbandry and dairy departments have implemented an additional work scheme of rupees 203 crores .
From very early times man has been dependent on agriculture for livelihood .
In most developed and developing countries agriculture is the main enterprise .
Raw material is received for the industries from agriculture .
Also from the export of the substances produced in it foreign currency is derived as well .
In any state agriculture , natural , cultural - social , political , economic and technical etc . there is the conjuncture of all the factors .
Only agriculture presents the combined depiction of all these factors .
Agriculture has come from Agricultura word of Latin Language .
The word Ager means land -LRB- farm -RRB- while the word Cultura denotes farming activity or farm culture .
Like this , in a brief manner the literal meaning of agriculture is from farming culture or farming art .
Hence the literal meaning of Agriculture Typology in Hindi is `` Agriculture typological analysis `` .
Generally agriculture type refers to the typological model developed in a specific region or interpretation or analysis which are naturally hierarchical .
Prof. Kosowski sir says that ` agricultural diversity ` is the uniformity of the agriculture related properties developed in a special area and specific pattern of agriculture related features are observed in many areas at the same time .
Meaning many areas can be found on the ground under one agricultural diversity .
Hence in the conceptualization of agricultural diversity under the agricultural land use related study social , organizational , technical and production related factors are given special importance .
There is a fundamental difference in the conception of State and diversity .
State is a regional concept which has definite boundaries .
The spatial variations in the State are controlled by the various factors of the environment whereas diversity is a hierarchical concept whose expanse is perpendicular from low till high order .
In the present the unavailability of statistics at all levels is the biggest problem and barrier in the study the studies related to agriculture .
To fix this problem conclusions are drawn based on the data collected by the sample studies and based on these findings itself rules and principles are enunciated .
The classification of agricultural diversity is based on the internal and inherent characteristics .
The intensification of agriculture is controlled by Geo - competence , Geo - productivity , labor employed in agriculture , farm equipment , fertilizers and pesticides , seeds etc .
Like this the subtle knowledge of all the above factors for the determination of agricultural diversity is important and necessary .
Vivid traditional agriculture - under this agriculture agriculture is done in large areas for livelihood on the basis of specialties coming from the ancient times .
Agriculture sector is done in the form of tenancy .
In this the use of land on large scale , lower output per worker , lower commercialization and specialization , no yield besides food grains etc . attributes are found .
Traditional intensive agriculture - in this the nature of agriculture with being of traditional form farming is also done with intensive technique .
This type of agriculture is done at such a low cost mostly in North , South - East and East Asia .
Self land - ownership is found in this agriculture on the basis of human labor .
Low mechanization and less chemical fertilizers are being used on small to micro-level terrain .
In this agriculture there is a description of low-cost and relatively low irrigation .
There is a prevalence of a mixed system of high land productivity as well as food crops and some livestock in this .
Market-oriented agriculture - the main feature of this agriculture is that under this more manufacturing is done with less human labor and high capital costs -LRB- irrigation , fertilizers , use of machines etc. -RRB- .
Its key feature is commercialization .
Highly specialized animal husbandry agriculture - under this type of agriculture priority is given to substances especially meat , bone , milk , wool , leather etc .
This agricultural diversity has become important to meet the urban needs in the outskirts of big cities .
The specialization in this enterprise is being done totally with the help of new tools keeping in mind the significance of the business .
Fish farming , poultry farming is also developed in such type of agriculture .
In the world this kind of agriculture is found in the countries Denmark , Holland , New Zealand etc .
According to Prof . Koharski sir the conceptualization of agricultural diversity is progressing .
There are changes also in the agricultural diversity due to the changes in the environmental conditions .
The study of Dr B . L. Sharma from the state of Rajasthan in the conception of agricultural history in India is worth mentioning .
The map of agricultural diversity displayed by them also features the climatic features of landscape features .
In comparison of the agriculture of the whole State the agriculture of Shri Ganganagar from the perspective of agricultural diversity has developed and commercially progressed .
Rajasthan is a desert state .
This animal husbandry is the main industry and food production is subsidiary .
Social change happens quite slowly and agriculture is also gets affected by these changes .
So it can be said that the prevailing agricultural traditions , conditions and practices are sustainable enough , similarly the farmer also does not take the bold step to change it soon .
Agricultural diversity is a major element in agriculture planning .
A thorough study of the agricultural diversity is necessary for the success of agricultural planning .
It is well known how practical will be the prepared agricultural planning without its overall study .
The agricultural planning done without agricultural-diversity study is totally impractical and misguided and such type of takes the society towards economic problems .
Hence agricultural diversity is not associated with the solutions to agricultural problems but is an important and indispensable step towards making the nation economically prosperous .
If all the major variables of Udaipur are considered then we reach to the conclusion that the per capita land holding size is very low and the tenant-farming practice is also very less .
The benefits of animals is used majorly in the agricultural sector in this State , along with this , the majority of animals is highly prevalent in this region .
The land productivity is as follows .
Also the output also is summed up in the following section .
Based on all these facts , we conclude that agriculture is in its primitive state , that is , to sustain life .
Agriculture can be developed after reforming these deficiencies .
Also events can also be organised for the cause of development .
This technique is practical in all the agriculture farming methods developed so far for agricultural localization .
This method will prove more useful and meaningful in the studies of localization , agriculture counterpart , improvements in agricultural issues and planning etc .
Economies and agricultural practices are controlled by climate , land ownership , relief , soil , size of holding and other factors .
It is quite a difficult work to study the system or the economy developed by the method including all the factors .
These crops and crop enterprises based on agriculture in the crop areas are included in agricultaral economy related to direct and indirect agriculture .
This system is born due to the expansion of agricultural types over large areas .
Hence these agricultural systems are developed because of various agricultural practices or types .
Like this many agriculture types can be under one system and many systems can meet under major agricultural types .
Nomadic pastoral - this economy is found in areas where geographical conditions are not right for crops .
There is natural grass available for cattle fodder .
Mainly these regions are found in arid States .
Such economies are found from the arid region of Sahara to the Arab , Tibet , Central - Asian countries , Mongolia and Tundra .
They are the means of animal survival .
The major occupation is to graze the animals from one location to another location .
Sheep is quite useful for the geographical conditions here .
With which everything wool , meat , milk and leather can be acquired .
Hence the animals in this area are the center of the economic system .
The duration of stay on one site is determined by the natural forage and water .
Kalmyks , Kirgiz , Kazakh , Khep and Mongol etc nomadic tribes etc are found in this economy .
Their home is a tent , cave or snow-cottage which can easily be moved from one place to another place or can be removed .
In the present world there has been a decline of such economic system .
Animal husbandry has been commercially launched there .
The credit of commercial animal husbandry goes to the immigrants .
The permanently settled after getting land ownership in the New World of the natural grass territories .
The private pasture surrounded from all four sides are called a ranch .
Such type of commercial animal husbandry not only developed in United States of America , but is also is central to agriculture also in Uruguay , Australia , Argentina , Brazil , New Zealand and South Africa .
The meat business is particularly significant in America due to the favorable environment for commercial livestock breeding , technological development and local big markets .
Wild boars used to roam around freely in this region of the European immigrants , these were the main source of sustaining life for the original inhabitants -LRB- Red Indians -RRB- .
At first , in the 16th century , the Spanish people developed the work of animal husbandry with their bulls , cows and horses in Mexico , Texas and California , because there was grass that grows throughout the year .
In the present times ranch exists in the Great Plains of the United States , the valleys of the Rockies and the irrigated valleys of the western arid regions .
Sheep breeding is the second major industry for the availability of wool .
In addition to beef cattle and sheep , angora goats are also reared .
Cows are bred in irrigated valleys for Milk .
Argentina - the fertile plains of the Pampas is famous for good natural grasslands , where the country ` s most famous beef , cattle and a third of sheep is bred .
It is the fourth leading country in terms of sheep and lambs .
In Argentina also , as a result of the availability of an extensive market , more beef -LRB- 85 % -RRB- is consumed .
Australia and New Zealand - when the immigrant Europeans arrived in Australia they brought their animals with them and the number of sheep here today is several times larger than the population of this place .
Therefore , it is Australia ` s leading economic means .
Here about 16 sheep , and 2 animals are found per person .
60 % of all the exports is achieved from this system .
Australia has the credit of exporting almost 46 % wool and 29 % meat of the world .
Here the ranch are of big size .
Animal husbandry here is of systematic and scientific type .
The growth of this industry is in South Wales , South Victoria and Queensland .
The regional distribution of sheep is determined by rainfall and temperature .
The areas with 50 to 75 cm rainfall are particularly appropriate for the animal husbandry sector .
21 ° C temperature is favorable for the sheep .
Shifting agriculture - this type of agriculture is the oldest work done on less fertile agricultural soils .
The agricultural system is in hot and wet tropical regions where there is high temperatures throughout the year , fields are prepared by first of all selecting the region on the borders of the forest and then burning by fire .
The average area of the farm used to be upto 2 hectares .
Human labor is used in agriculture .
The fields are not private but public .
Agriculture is done for two years , after that it is left out and another field is selected because due to more rain there is rapid erosion of soil fertility because of which soil fertility is lost sooner .
Production used to be low , more hard work was required and the produced crops used more locally .
Only food crops are produced - millet , maize , rice are main in these .
Secondary crops are beans , tomatoes , Mauniyakh , sugar cane , peanuts and banana .
Poultry is main in animals .
Besides agriculture , fishing , surviving by collecting forest food , hunting are a major enterprise .
The initial steady Agriculture - this agriculture is of primitive type .
Due to lack of fertilizers the land has to be left fallow .
Hot and wet tropical plateau , hot and wet tropical mountainous parts , the plains with hot and wet tropical climate , where the population density is relatively high , there this agricultural system it is more prevalent .
Preliminary sustainable agriculture takes place in areas where rainfall is low and dryness is more .
In these hot and wet tropical plateaus , plantation agriculture -LRB- rubber , palm , coca , etc. -RRB- has developed due to which there has also been a development in the farming method of the local farmers .
This system is more intensive than shifting agriculture .
This type of agriculture has developed in the plantation sectors , and areas close to mines .
Intensive life-giving agriculture - it is found in parts of Asia monsoon agriculture , particularly where geographical conditions are particularly suitable for agriculture .
Food crops are produced intended for local use .
In this agriculture use of modern agricultural equipment is less .
Also the use of chemical pharmaceuticals , fertilizers etc . is less .
Due to excess of population , the production is consumed locally .
Additional production for the market can not be done .
A shortage of bazaar or big markets is also found .
Due to a very low per capita production in this agricultural system , the economic situation of the farmers is very weak .
The rice dominated intensive livelihood farming - this type of farming systems are found in regions with annual average rainfall of 200 cm .
This kind of agriculture is done more in countries which come under monsoon climate .
Such agricultural method is called Sagah .
With the perspective of agricultural land use also the rice sector is found more in South East Asian countries in which Laos -LRB- 95 % -RRB- , Thailand -LRB- 65 % -RRB- , Myanmar -LRB- 60 % -RRB- , Japan -LRB- 42 % -RRB- , India and China -LRB- 25 % -RRB- etc . are important .
Nirwahi less intensive rice agriculture - in areas where rainfall is scant cm there are more rice than other crops .
In the monsoon season , except the dense regions where the environmental conditions are favorable crops like millet , pigeon pea , sorghum , maize etc . are cultivated .
There is a production of cotton and wheat where irrigation facilities are available .
Hence according to the temperature and amount of rainfall there is a majority of only one crop among wheat , millet , sorghum , etc .
Farmers produce two or three crops in a year .
In this arrangement , the production of dairy , cattle , beef etc is less .
The area under pasture region is negligible .
The people of this part are vegetarian .
Special encouragement has been given by the government in recent years towards dairy , cattle rearing , sheep , piggery , poultry , fish , rearing silkworms etc .
The commercial plantation business - this is a specialized agricultural system whose history is nearly a hundred years old , this method developed with the British race of America .
Europe and the U . S . have invested capital in the development of this agricultural system , various types of products are created in this system with commercial approach which includes sugercane , spices , banana , tea , coconut , kehwa , cocoa , rubber etc .
These are produced in gardens with commercial purpose .
The main three regions of plantation agriculture in the world are Africa , Latin America and South - East Asia .
Plantation happens in agriculture farms , that is why its area is larger as compared to the normal holding .
India ` s major plantation crop is tea , due to which the average area of the gardens are found with 120 to 240 hectares .
The plantation agriculture areas in the countries of the world today , there was no problem of agricultural land there .
The major barrier was of the workers .
Hence agricultural workers had to be imported in the areas of planting in the relatively densely populated countries of the world .
The major exporters of labor have been Africa , India and currently are as well .
A dominance of the Chinese workers is found in Hindeshia -LRB- Sumatra and Borneo -RRB- and Philippines , Japan in the Hawaiian Islands .
The need of workers is more in plantation agriculture .
There is a major requirement of labors here for preparing the fields , planting , plant inspection , fertilizers , crop picking and transport of manufactured goods .
Also , such machines have not yet been invented with which work like using the plants , collecting coffee , cotton and tea picking , cutting , loading , sugar peeling and extracting milk from rubber trees etc . can be done .
Hence the importance of plantation workers in agriculture still remains just the same .
As the foreign market expanded , plantation agriculture got encouragement and it expanded .
In the present circumstances , all those countries became free from where the plantation agriculture produce was exported to the ruler countries .
Despite the independence of these countries , the export of plantation agriculture produce is leading for the international trade , because economic robustness comes from foreign income .
This matter has to be taken care of while deciding the status of the gardens that transportation to different parts of the world from here is convenient and cheap .
The means of transportation are also needed within the gardens because plantations spread in the plantation agriculture is in thousands of hectares and there is a difficulty in collecting the production in that area .
Mostly there are roads in between the large gardens with which produced material is collected in one place .
Roads and rail lines are required to send the produce from these gardens to the market and the port .
Keeping this in mind , almost all the plantation areas are located close to the coastal areas and islands which can make traffic convenient and inexpensive .
The agricultural system and management of the foreigners was far more efficient than the local farmers .
The scientists also used agriculture related knowledge for the abundance of the produce .
All kinds of crops in the plantation agriculture are such whose modification is necessary because the form in which these outputs are received from the gardens , these can not be sent to the markets the same way .
Thus , in view of the economic benefits , it is useful to install adjacent industrially modified machines .
Currently , there has been a special inclination towards plantation agriculture in every country of the world because due to the use of machines in agriculture this is getting started in the tropical and subtropical as well as high places .
The cultivation time is considerably saved by using machines during preparing the fields , planting and harvesting .
In cold regions where the growing season is quite short , expansion of plantation agriculture has not been possible .
Mediterranean Agricultural System - this agricultural system is found in all the continents in the areas with Mediterranean climate , this place has not been named depending on the particular crop but has been done based on the climate .
Sustenance , business , animal husbandry based on the crops irrigated in summers , winter time rainfed agricultural production , the production of vegetable , fruit , food crops ; many methods are adopted under this agricultural system .
This is the only part of the world where coastal plains , high mountain terrain , narrow valleys and small plains are found together .
Because of regional variation various agricultural enterprises like food production , fruit production and sheep - goat rearing etc . are adopted in these areas .
It rains during the winter season and the summer season stays dry in this agricultural land .
Due to rains and regional differences in the amount and time In part because of of precipitation and environment .
Generally in these oceanic land areas management cultivation of both kinds , commercial and sustainable cultivation is carried .
Both these systems of mutual and regional significance are determined and regulated by the amount of rainfall , proximity to markets , agricultural skill and with the help of government .
Gum and alcohol in Greece , oranges , olives and alcohol in Spain , oranges in south California and vegetables during winters are found in abundance .
Further , dry summers are quite appropriate for the production of fruits and vegetables .
Here all the vegetables of temperate climate are grown .
Along with fruits and vegetables , fodder crops , alfalfa , werch , clover , kupine etc are also cultivated .
Fodder cultivation is totally dependent on climate .
Here pastures are used for a short time .
since there is intense heat in the lower regions and winter rains in hilly regions it gets less time .
In the world high percentage of goats , sheep , pigs and other small animals are found in the nearby countries of Mediterranean sea .
Here poultry industry has also been developed at large scale .
Milk and cattle rearing is the major commercial work in the nearby areas of the town .
Here , some areas have preponderance of butter and cotton cheese while fresh milk is supplied in local areas .
The production of un-irrigated plants and creepers are major cultivation of Mediterranean sea region .
Olives , dates and grapes are included in this method .
These trees and creeper crops are the major productions .
Olive is the most significant among them .
All the geographical conditions for olive production are available here .
90 % of the world ` s olive is produced in Mediterranean sea regions .
The second major crop is grapes .
Grapes are grown in abundance in the form of dry farming in some parts of Mediterranean basin , south Africa , Australia and Chile .
This method was developed as a result of Commercial food and agricultural production technology .
This kind of farming is found in expanded dry and humid regions of mid latitudinal grass .
The soil here is more fertile due to the deposition vegetation and ice .
As compared to other systems , agriculture includes limited regions .
due to lack of population the per person production is quite more .
Local consumption is very limited .
Therefore a large amount of food grain is left for commercial purpose .
Contrariety is found in the commercial production of food grain & rice .
While wheat is the major exporting cereal of international market .
Crop rotation method is the chief specialty of this place in agricultural use .
This change helps in up keeping the fertility of soil .
For example a form contains rotation method for six years where oats in the first year , turnip or potatoes in the second year , again oats in third year and for the next three years grass is grown .
There is maximum application of capital in the mixed agricultural system .
This cultivation requires both capital and labor .
Cyclic rains are received throughout the year in the form of light showers which is quite beneficial for the farm .
successful production and cattle rearing both are carried together .
Crops are produced for feeding cattle .
In Europe and United states the populations is spread on farms .
On few parts of the farm , houses of farmers , shades of cattle , stores of fodder and cattle stable are found .
Life sustaining crop and cattle rearing cultivation - This cultivation system was developed in northern Europe .
There has been such an advancement in the current developing times that this kind of agricultural system in the world has transformed in the form of commercial crop and cattle rearing agriculture .
Just a single crop is grown because of excess cold and dry weather conditions .
One has to adopt cattle rearing due to the helplessness of growing a single crop in a year .
Today , along with raised standard of living , the demand for dairy products has also increased extraordinarily .
Which means reform in the variety of cattle , separately developing the varieties of flesh and dairy cattle .
As a result of the development of machines and refrigerators that rear milk and create other objects and current reform in cattle varieties the dairy industry has come up at a scientific level .
Further , in this system the invention and development of swift vehicles has proved to be a boon .
Specialized gardening cultivation - Such cultivation is carried specially in the densely populated nations of north western Europe , Great Britain , Denmark , Belgium , France , Germany etc .
Under this method , crops -LRB- vegetables , fruits , flowers etc , -RRB- are cultivated .
In this method the size of the farm is small .
It is called ` truck farming ` in United States of America .
Here , the size of farms are bigger .
In this situation , right amount of water at the right time , manure , medicines and other equipment are required to get adequate production from farms .
Therefore , only skilled farmers with expertise in vegetable and fruit production are hired .
India also has favorable geographical conditions for this system -LRB- adequate temperature , sun light , multiplication time , humid climate and appropriate soi .
As a result of this appropriateness , fruits and flowers are grown in small farms and orchards .
Potatoes , onions , cauliflower , turnip , aubergine , lady ` s finger are significant vegetables .
In the recent years , there has been revolutionary development due to the increasing demand for vegetables , urbanization , reforms in seeds of flowers and fruits and industrialization .
Man has been doing cultivation since ancient times .
Agriculture has been an economic activity of humans .
The agricultural techniques changed with changing times .
In several regions of the world , agriculture is still carried using ancient methods but it has taken a commercial form in developed regions .
This is the reason why several methods are used for agricultural work in the world .
McCarthy while defining agriculture says that agriculture is an objective oriented activity of producing crops and cattle rearing .
It is clear that as per the boundaries of agriculture , primary activities such soil nutrition , soil use , crop production , gardening , cattle rearing , irrigation , fish culture are included .
Agriculture is still a life sustaining occupation in the areas where there is low growth activity but managed and commercial cultivation is carried in areas with developed economy .
It is not proper to compare American agriculture with Indian agriculture .
A complete commercial form of agriculture is found in United states of America which is among the major industrial countries of the world while India has mixed form of Agriculture where farmers grow some crops with commercial perspective .
The cultivation of tea is appropriate only on slopes .
It is clear that due to the unevenness of physical and human factors in the world , the presence of multiplicity in the form of agriculture is natural .
The production of vegetables , fruits , flowers , milk etc . is commonly seen around the town while in the remote areas there is prevalence of agricultural activities such as cereals and cattle rearing .
The region where a prevalence of a specific kind of farming is done becomes the identity of that region .
The German scholar Wan Theanin first tried to explain the localization of modern agriculture and later several scholars played significant roles in this sector .
The profit gained from crop production determines the economic prosperity of a farmer , therefore the selection of crops is done keeping in mind the place of production and market i.e the distance between production and consumers because the profit that is gained from additional yield becomes the basis of the localization of agriculture .
The profit due to the agricultural products are jointly affected by the production cost and transportation cost .
Further , the localization of agriculture is also affected by the socio-cultural system .
The theory of localization of agriculture was first propounded by J . H . Wan Thunen himself on the basis of his knowledge of agriculture in 1826 .
This German scholar through the scientific method carried at his Maclawerg agricultural farm came to the conclusion that economic elements are more powerful as compared to the physical elements in the localization of agriculture .
Wan Thunen propounded his theory on the basis that the use of agricultural land increases with the increase in distance from the market .
He also believes that the volume of land use i . e . the form of getting more production through more investment also changes with the distance and it signifies that some underlying aspect is responsible for this .
Crop production affects several physical , social , cultural and economic factors but market is the most significant of all because the increasing distance from the market greatly impacts the density of agriculture and structure of land use .
According to the increasing distance from the market from all sides the profit of crop production will always become less .
Because the transportation cost will keep increasing .
Wan thunen believes that only those crops are grown on a piece of land which provide more profit .
The increasing distance from the cities and town has resulted in the reduction of production and profit and it has also changed the structure of land use and selection of crops .
The profit decreases due to the increasing transportation cost on the outskirts of towns and it leads to the -LRB- prevalence of cattle rearing .
Opposite to this , there is more scope for profit due to the less transportation cost if it is near the towns and it also develops dense land use along with gardening , milk production and dense agriculture .
On the basis of his lonesome experience , Wan Thunen has tried to explain that market is the root of the localization of agriculture which determines the structure of agriculture though this fact is not applicable everywhere .
Losh criticized the theory of Wan Thunen and explained that it is not possible to generalize of this basis .
It can be implemented only in some situations .
Yet it is accepted that Wan Thunen has tried to explain some aspects of modern market prone agriculture .
In 1996 , Mccarty and Lindberg propounded the theory of most favorable economic conditions and limitations .
The favorable nature of economic factors gradually decreases with the increasing distance from this region , consequently the production cost increases .
Distinctness also appears in the form of agriculture .
Several categories of agriculture develop due to this change .
The conception of this theory in physical authentication is more near to truth therefore it is more acceptable .
Mccarty and Lindberg included all the essential elements for the description of his theory such as land , total cost incurred , labor , transportation , irrigation etc .
They believe that the production limit shall be determined in accordance with the market value .
In such situations the milk producer has to make sure whether he would supply milk in its original form or transform it into cotton cheese , butter etc . so that more profit can be gained .
Hence the farmer takes his decision as per his profit .
The profit will be decided on the result of difference between cost incurred and supply cost .
Such situations are visible only near the towns in our country .
Olaf Johnson studied few ideologies of Thunen ` s presumptions in 1920 .
By studying it Johnson came to the conclusion that the town or village situation puts clear impact on the structure of land use .
According to him , dense cultivation is done in the nearby areas outside the town or village where crops like vegetables , fruits , flowers are primarily grown .
The vegetables growing outward from this internal vasculum such as potatoes and some profitable crops such as tobacco , fodder etc are prevalent .
Huver presented his theory of agricultural localization in the year 1948 which depends on the local structure of economic activity .
At the place of lone market he has considered the presence of five nearby markets .
Further , he has described land use in the situations of mutual competition .
Milk is a substance that perishes very soon and it requires nearby market and fast transportation .
This is the reason , it is produced near all the towns .
Opposite to this , due to the good portability and relatively less transportation cost of wheat and legumes they can be produced in far flung areas relative to the market .
Thus , difference can not appear in the basic structure of land use due to the presence of several markets and the land revenue determines the land use .
The regions of natural boundaries and favorable conditions of crop production do not remain same all the time .
In due course of time , because of the technical advancement , the situation of resourcefulness of soil and production capacity of soil and concerned cost elements keeps changing and along with this changes the natural boundaries and favorable conditions of the regions of different crop productions .
For example in the current times due to the invention of wheat varieties getting prepared quickly , it can be grown even in more colder regions .
Only that crop will be produced in the regions with favorable conditions which gives more profit .
In majority of the agricultural areas , farmer prepares more than one crop in a field .
And the major is reason is that farmers get different kinds internal saving bu growing several crops together .
It gives many kinds of profit such as crop rotation for proper land use , proper utilization of crops , labor and machines , security from total damage of a specif crop etc . .
There is similar significance of variation of economic revenue in the localization of agriculture as it is of a regional variation of labor in any labor intensive industry or of a regional variation of power in a power intensive industry .
The fruit as well as the plant of coriander are beneficial .
It is used in a variety of ways .
It is sold at good prices in the market because of its qualities .
All the farmers cultivate it and earn profit by selling even its green leaves .
After cutting the leaves the plants are left as a last crop to bear fruits .
Its fruit is used in the form of spice .
Its leaves and fruits are used in the form of herbs and spices .
Its fruits -LRB- seed -RRB- are used in the form of roasted or un-roasted spice to make curry powder , sauce and spices .
Coriander is extensively used in India .
The global production of coriander seed is around 6 million tonnes .
The major exporting countries are India , Turkey , Romania , Morocco , Iran and China .
Its major importing countries are middle east , south east Asia , america , Britain , Germany etc .
On an average India produces around 3 million tonnes annually .
While India is the biggest producer it is also the biggest consumer and exporter .
Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh are the major producing states of India .
Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh produce around 54 % and 17 % coriander respectively .
In India coriander is grown in many forms .
It can be cultivated in all the three crops Rabi , Kharif and Zaid .
In the kharif season farmers sow it by August and September and in Rabi it is sown in October and November .
While it is sown as zaid crop in the month of February .
Zaid crops give better prices for green leaves .
The farmers get the stems of the coriander cut in spite of plucking them from the root .
They earn by selling the stems and leave the crop which yields fruits after selling the stem thrice .
Although one has to pay special attention on irrigation in Zaid .
There are several varieties of coriander .
coriander is basically a rabi crop but it is also grown as a zaid crop .
In majority of the parts of India it is a rain based crop therefore it is grown in the form of pure or mixed crop .
In the southern states it is cultivated in both the seasons .
It is cultivated firstly during May to August and secondly during October to January .
similarly the second week of October-November is also considered appropriate for the cultivation of coriander .
There is no need of adopting a special method for the cultivation of coriander .
The sprouting is as good as brittle is the soil .
If coriander is being cultivated in the kharif season then one should take care of the following things .
Because during that period it can rain anytime .
Because of the heavy rains soil coats on the crops and it affects sprouting .
The cultivation of kharif season should be done taking care of the fact that there is good arrangement for water in the farms i . e . water should not stand in beds .
If coriander is being cultivated in the zaid season then it requires more water .
In such situations small beds should be made .
One should be careful regarding the amount of coriander seeds .
The amount of seeds are increased in the regions where coriander leaves are sold .
On an average 22-25 kilograms of seeds are sown per hectare through sprinkling method .
If coriander is grown in garbage then 15 kilograms of seeds are sufficient .
Coriander should be sown in rows .
If the temperature of soil is 17 degree at the time of sowing then it is considered good because this temperature does not affect sprouting .
Coriander seeds are treated before sowing .
In the indigenous method neem oil is mixed with its seeds .
Similarly coriander seeds can also be purified by mixing them with fungicide .
There should not be more use of chemical fertilizer in the cultivation of coriander .
It is more beneficial to use organic manure in the cultivation of coriander .
For getting surplus production , 15 quintal compost manure should be put before ploughing the field .
Later , during the second ploghing , 50 kilograms of neem manure should be put with sulfate and should be ploughed gently .
While sowing it is beneficial to add five kilograms  acre of magnesium .
The plants remain green if organic manure is used .
Irrigation is the most important aspect in coriander cultivation .
While irrigating one should be careful that there isn ` t much water in the beds .
Coriander requires negligible water during Kharif season but one has to be careful while irrigating coriander during zaid season .
If it takes longer for the coriander fruits to ripe then it should be irrigated one more time after 125 days .
It makes the grains strong and their weight also increases .
A lot many weeds erupt along with coriander crop .
These weeds affect the growth of plants .
In such situations weeding should be done when coriander plants carry 2-3 leaves .
While preparing the field for weed control , the farm should be ploughed and left for some days .
It dries all the weeds .
They should be plucked and put out of the field .
Weeding should be done twice for weed control .
Coriander crops are affected more by insects .
One should be careful about this during zaid crop .
Though kharif crop also catches insects but there is less fury of insects in rabi crops .
Chaumpa insect generally attacks three crops .
They affect during flowering .
Microzyme , sulfur is sprayed to control it .
Building fumes near the farm is also beneficial .
In an organic way , spraying a solution of neem oil and water is quite beneficial .
Coriander crop catches several kinds of diseases also .
Sandy loamy soil is affected more by wilting disease .
It destroys the root of the plant and the plant fades and becomes dry .
Similarly coriander also catches stem wound disease .
Here , the upper portion of the plant dries and becomes infected .
Similarly coriander also catches powdery mildew .
It is a fungal infected disease .
In the initial period of this disease , the leaves and branches carry a white flour like substance .
The leaves turn yellow and curl when the impact is severe .
0.1 % of bevestine can be sprayed to control it .
Severe cold climate can also destroy coriander crops .
Little irrigation can be done if there is scope for severe cold .
Coriander crops are sold as leaves in some areas .
In such situations the leaves can be cut when the farm becomes wet after first irrigation .
After cutting the leaves , irrigation and top urea dressing should be done .
If one wants to take only the coriander fruits then it should be harvested after 100 days when the fruits start drying .
During this period the seed bunches become brown .
After the harvesting , the crop should be dried in the open in shade .
The grains are separated and cleaned when then dry completely .
The farmers in the eastern region of Uttar Pradesh get double earning by sowing coriander along with winter sugarcane .
Sugarcane are affected less by insects if they are sown with coriander .
It not only gives good production of coriander but also 5-6 quintals of coriander are obtained in one acre of farm .
Coriander is sown with winter sugarcane by 15th December .
The experts believe that the sugarcane sown in winters give 20-25 % more production than the one sown during spring .
Flowers and betel leaves are grown in Varanasi and rest other areas , but people were unaware of banana cultivation .
They themselves grew only wheat and paddy initially .
Thus people considered farming to be a loss making deal .
Bananas are reaching the markets through trucks from Barabanki .
The farmers of this area have become attracted towards banana cultivation and they are improving their economic condition by cultivating bananas .
ShivKumar says that he came in touch with NAIP during 2009 .
In the beginning he could not understand the agricultural scientists and officers .
For the first time in the year 2009 , paddy and wheat were sown in 0.60 hectare land through SRI method while banana was cultivated on 0.15 hectare land .
When the G9 variety of banana was grown in the field for the first time then some farmers made fun of this .
The scientists adopted the said technique and there was huge paddy and banana production despite late arrival of monsoon .
After paddy , they grew wheat through zero till method during rabi season which saved cost .
Sowing wheat without ploughing once gave disappointment but this experiment seemed to be good when adequate production was obtained .
They kept cultivating banana along with paddy and wheat .
Thus 1,63,500 INR was obtained from a total production of 0.15 hectare land .
They established a paddy mill from the saving done by selling banana crop .
Discussions of agriculture is also carried along with obtaining rice from paddy .
There should be good system for water drainage in the field .
Banana can not be cultivated in excess acidic or alkaline soil .
similarly pits should be dug and cow dung manure should be essentially put in it before planting trees .
It always gives strength to the plants .
5 grams of thimate insecticide should be put in the pit .
Banana crop requires more water .
In such situations it is quite beneficial to irrigate through drip technique .
If the farmers carry the cultivation by considering the suggestions by agricultural scientists then certainly they will be successful and farming would be a profitable rather than a loss making deal .
Some farmers of Raibareilly are also cultivating bananas .
Seeing its profit , the farmers of the nearby districts have become attracted towards it .
Very soon Uttar Pradesh can be the number one producer of banana .
A farmer committed suicide by being upset due the destroying of crops due to rains and hailstones .
It is being said that he was in distress since the destroying of gram crops due to hailstones .
On Tuesday morning , farmer Govardhan Rathore of Kharpa village , Jirapur tahsil was found hanging in his farm ` s well .
An after the farmer had committed suicide , the chief minister ShivRaj singh Chauhan had come to the nearby Chamarkhera village to get the review of the loss occurred .
In front of him the local administrative officers were telling the farmer to be a mad and ill person .
The crops were destroyed most in Jirapur Tehsil because of the rains and hailstorm during Friday and Sunday .
Despite this , nobody has come to do any survey till date in several villages .
There has been no survey even in the deceased ` s village Kharpa .
With the arrival of summers , several varieties of mangoes have come up in the market for mango lovers .
Currently , only the mangoes of southern India are in market .
Although , because of the changes in climate , the crop production has been relatively less than the previous year .
Those concerned with mangoes ` business in Azadpur fruits and vegetable market say that the mangoes that are seen in the market now are coming from Andhra Pradesh and Kerala .
Mangoes are being supplied from Andhra Pradesh ` s Warangal , Vijaywada and Vijaynagar .
Amongst them are safeda , Peerkaman , Ratnagiri ` s Alfanso , surkha and three varieties of mangoes from Kerala .
Further , safeda mango is also being supplied from Hyderabad .
Amit Gidwani concerned with mangoes ` business in Azadpur market says that 6 kg packets of Alfanso mango is coming in bulk at Rs , 350 .
There is a little more increase in its price in retail market .
Because of the changes in climatic condition , this time mango crops have matured 15 days prior to its usual timing .
He says that southern mangoes would stay for one more month in the market now .
By the end of May , dussehri , chausa and Langda mangoes would arrive from Uttar Pradesh .
One more businessman , Ramesh says that mangoes are a bit costlier now .
That is why now they are not being sold much .
Their price increases it retail market because they are quite expensive when bought in bulk .
That is why mango lovers are now buying mangoes just to get a taste of it .
The plants should be kept as per their requirement .
Some plants require more sunlight such as bougainvillea , adenium , ferkeria , morpankhi etc .
similarly some plants stay well in shade such as alpinia , aglonima , filodendron , defenwechia , dresina etc .
Some plants require semi-shade .
The plants are - arica palm , cycas , camellia , some species of bamboo etc .
Morning sunlight is very good for semi-shade plants .
The shade plants are also used for interior decoration .
It is very good to have two sets of such plants inside home for decoration .
Keep one set of plants in open air -LRB- where there is sunlight -RRB- and they can be kept inside after some days .
If plants with colorful leaves are kept under the shade of a tree then they get natural air .
Further , the color of plants also remain better .
One should be careful that there isn ` t much sunlight there .
Various species of cycus are now available which look beautiful and can be arranged in a variety of ways .
Similarly , moneyplant which is also called pachira is considered quite auspicious from the point of view of vastu .
Several species of ficus are grafted to make designer plants .
They are also very attractive to see .
The protest of national farmer labor organization continued for the 18th day -LRB- Friday -RRB- also in the Chaudhri Charan singh park .
The chairman of the organization , Sardar V . M . singh said that the goal of the movement is not only to give thee clearance of their dues and sugarcane price but also to bring back the farmers who are leaving farming due to exploitation .
He said that a grand Panchayat of the farmers has been called on Friday where a large number of farmers will be involved .
He was addressing the farmers present at the event .
He said that though India is a agricultural dominant country but the farmers here are the most troubled .
The government wants the farmers ` land on less than the actual price for establishing industries and colonies for the industrialists .
He said that the situation is this that even the sons are running away from farming seeing the financial crunch of their fathers .
The politicians are not going to give anything other than snatching hence fight yourself till death .
The poet Dr . Hariom Pawar filled enthusiasm amongst the farmers through his poetry at the protest .
Gram is the major edible source of a supernumerary population of the world .
It is also a big source of income for the small farmers .
For quite a long time the agricultural scientists have been trying to know how its quality should be improved , how can it be made nutritive and how can its production be increased .
Their hard work now seems to be fruitful .
The international team of scientists including the Indian agricultural scientists have been successful in studying the genome of gram .
They have analyzed 90 various varieties of gram genes including the most popular kabuli -LRB- CDC frontier -RRB- .
This achievement will help in improving the quality , bringing more genetic diversity and making them disease and dryness resistant by reforming the varieties of gram .
According to a research paper published in nature biotechnology , for gene analysis the scientists have chosen 90 species of gram found in around 10 various countries .
It also has some wild varieties .
Apart from the genome this paper also has the description of special works by all the genes and it is also described how persistent production can be determined by improving crop through gene analysis .
The international crop research institute , Hyderabad is guiding the international team .
This institute researches the crop grown in semi dry tropical regions .
The teams of scientists have identified around 28,286 genes in kabuli gram .
The genetic basis of gram can be strengthened through genome .
with this the farmers engaged in gram cultivation can cope in a better way with the challenges of climatic changes arising due to temperature increase .
After soybean , gram is the second biggest pulse crop of the world .
It is cultivated in around 1.15 billion hectare area of the world .
Majority of the cultivation is done by those small and poor farmers of semi dry tropical regions who are deprived of resources .
According to Dr . Rajiv Varshney , the Indian scientist associated with this project , reform can be brought in the breeding techniques by shortlisting good genes of gram through gene study .
Now , 4-8 years are required to develop new varieties of gram through traditional breeding .
Adopting the technique based on genome analysis prepares new varieties in half the time .
Apart from being the largest producer of gram , India is also its biggest consumer .
In on around 66.70 million hectare region of the country , 53 million tonne gram is produced .
Despite the increase in the production of gram in the country , there is reduction in the area under its cultivation .
Initially gram was sown in around 75.70 million hectare area .
Now , it is grown only on 66.70 million hectare area .
Gram is grown at a large scale in six states of the country namely - Madhya Pradesh , Rajasthan , Maharashtra , Uttar Pradesh , Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh .
91 % of the total gram production of the country comes from these states only .
Due to the expansion in irrigation facilities in the northern states wheat and mustard is being cultivated at the place of gram in a bigger area .
These figures clearly reveal that there is great scope for gram production in the country .
But one has to adopt appropriate strategies for this .
In this regard the genome analysis of gram keeps special significance for India .
With the help of improved varieties after gene analysis , the Indian farmers will not only be able to increase gram production but will also increase their earning .
Being the cheapest source of protein gram plays a significant role in tackling starvation and malnutrition .
Crops like gram are also important in tolerating the shocks due to high temperature in the world .
Hence in order to ensure food security for future we have to pay more attention on gram cultivation .
The food grain storage capacity of Bihar , the state producing 70 million tonne paddy is even less than 7 million tonne .
The farmers of the state are compelled to sell their crops in open market on less than their actual prices because of withdrawal of the FCI from governmental purchase .
The cheap paddy of Bihar is reaching the rice mills of Uttar Pradesh and Punjab .
The situation has become more worse due to the unavailability of private investment for building granaries against the promises of the state government .
On the other hand , the government has closed the markets long back because of which there is no place for the official sale of agricultural produce .
The situation is so worse that the paddy of 2011-12 season could not be sold yet then how can the paddy of current season 2012-13 be sold .
The food and ration minister shyam Rajak has no answers for this .
Yet he has appealed the farmers of the state to sell the paddy in the open market at less than the support price .
The actual food storage capacity of the state is around 6.45 million tonne .
They include the granaries taken on rent for state storage council , national storage council and Indian food council .
The state has almost no mills for building rice from paddy .
The state government has closed the market system long back .
Which means there are no government markets in the state .
This is the reason , the paddy farmers of the state are selling their produce at very low prices to the private businessmen .
The paddy of the farmers living near the border of Uttar Pradesh are bought by the state ` s businessmen at 30 % less than the support price .
Currently the support price for paddy is 1250 rupees .
There are more number of rice mills in Uttar Pradesh .
According to a senior officer of the central food ministry , two years back in Bihar it was decided to build a granary of 3 million tonne capacity .
Formalities were also done by issuing tender for 90 thousand tonne capacity .
The grand Panchayat of farmers under the Indian farmers Union -LRB- IFU -RRB- has come up on parliament street .
The farmers decided to remain there till they agree to the demand for asking right prices for the crop .
The national spokesperson of IFU , Rakesh Tikait said that the farmers movement is reminding us of Mahendra Singh Tikait .
The farmers have started coming to Delhi on the same lines .
Now they have entered the Delhi border with 25 tractor food stuffs .
They have decided that the protest will not end on small conditions .
The committee held under the chairmanship of the council of economic advisory of the Prime minister handed over its report regarding making sugar industry control free .
On the basis of this the government has agreed to make sugar industry partially control free .
But this decision is not in the favor of sugarcane farmers or consumers but in the favor of sugar mills .
Ending the compulsion to sell levy sugar will yield a profit of at least 10 % to the sugarcane mills .
Not having sugar release order and handing over sugar to the market , especially on festive occasions will lead to the willfulness of rice mills and can increase sugar prices and the consumers have to directly bear its brunt .
It will lead to fluctuation in sugar prices in open markets and the government will have no solution to stop it .
Thus sugar mills can also import raw sugar if just 10 % tax is kept on imported sugar .
The sugarcane producing farmers have to bear its brunt .
The Rangarajan committee had recommended to stop the rights that the state government has in the form of state advisory price for determining the sugarcane price but it was not approved .
Further the distance between sugar mills was also duly kept .
It could be possible only because of the strong opposition of agricultural experts and farmers .
In the recommendations of the committee it was proposed to associate sugarcane prices with sugar recovery which was against the benefits of sugarcane farmers of north India .
Indeed , there is need for substantive reform in sugar region so that poor citizens get cheap sugar and the sugarcane mills get no harm .
But the interest of the sugarcane producing farmers were ignored in the sugarcane policy .
The sugarcane producing farmers have not been given profitable price and the payment of their sugarcane price is also not being done on time .
It can destroy farmers .
The argument of some leaders that partially making sugar control free will help the farmers in payment has no strength .
Can they say whether the farmers are being given any other donation in addition to the set sugarcane pr e ?
It is also a noteworthy subject that the appropriate and profitable sugarcane price of the central government which is 170 rupees is neither appropriate nor beneficial .
It is even 110-120 rupees less than the declared sugarcane price of the Uttar Pradesh government which is 280-290 rupees .
For the past one year the prices of labor , diesel , fertilizers , ploughing and harvesting have increased because of which the estimate of sugarcane production price has increased to 314 rupees  quintal from the last years 270 .
Thus , the farmers are getting sugarcane price even less than the production cost while according to the recommendations of the chairman of national farmers council Dr . Swaminathan , the government should determine the sugarcane price up to 1.5 times more .
The sugar requirement in the country is 220 million tonne while its production is 250 million tonnes .
The granaries also have last year ` s 60 million tonne .
This is beyond our understanding why the import tax from abroad is reduced and raw sugar is being imported .
The sugar mills wants to get rid of it by freeing the reserve area for sugarcane .
If it is fulfilled then the sugar mills will be able to purchase sugarcane as per its wish even outside the boundary of 15 kilometers .
It will lead to a battle between mills and co-operative mills will not survive before private mills .
According to the Uttar Pradesh Sugarcane -LRB- supply and purchase regulation -RRB- the sugar mills have the right to buy sugarcane from a specific area .
The sugarcane of some farmers can remain the farm because of its end .
Bustar is famous for mahua liquor .
But now , it is also used to make edible items such as pickle , chutney , laddoo , chikki and vinegar .
It is also being used to make cake .
For the past two years experiments are being carried in the public science center , Mudpar village for making edible items from mahua .
The biotechnology department of Delhi is also researching on the same .
The meaning results of this research have now started to come up .
Initially the center only made mango and lemon pickles but now pickles , chutney and laddoo are also being made from mahua .
The rural women are formally being trained for this work .
The in-charge of the center LalaRam Sinha said that he had heard from the elders of the village that pickles and chutney are made from mahua .
Therefore he himself first experimented this .
After the success , he is now training the women .
Homely women and self help groups can adopt this as a job .
He said that now markets are also being searched for this .
We do not know the qualities and disadvantages of several medicinal plants but they can prove to be life saving for us .
One such medicinal plant is pipli which is found to be quite effective in destroying harmful fungus Candida .
You should know that the candida fungus affecting most of the people affects the mouth , neck , edges of lips and the area under the joints .
Under the innovation project of Delhi University , research is being carried on the effect of plants that deactivate candida fungus .
The mentor of this research is Jawaharlal Nehru University ` s professor Prof . Tulika Prasad .
The research carried with the association of life science ` s Asst . Professor Dr . Hardeep Kaur will very soon reach its last stage .
Dr. Kaur told that the bodies of 80 % of the people already carry candida fungus but it does not harm them .
But if the resistant capacity of our body starts decreasing then it becomes active and makes the body severely ill .
This fungus reduces the resistant capacity of the body in surgery , T . B . and any kind of infection .
It is more harmful for the women because women are more prone to fungal infection .
If anyone has the longing to do something in adverse conditions and if there is availability of technique then nothing is impossible .
Seeing sandal and gmelina arborea trees in the deserted land of Thar where trees couldn ` t be seen for miles is no less than a miracle .
Rare plants are grown in a Narayan garden , situated around 11 kms away from golden town and several ayurvedic herbs are also being grown there .
Narayan garden has been honored several times for cultivating rare plants in extreme conditions and giving good yield .
Further , Dilip singh Rajawat has also been awarded as a progressive farmer for his qualities .
The Narayan garden expanded in 300 bighas will soon have a contract with Kajri .
The officers of the Madhya Pradesh ` s agriculture department claim that despite hailstone the state will produce more wheat than the previous year .
In the national conference organized by the Central agriculture ministry , the agricultural enterprises of MP have estimated to have produced 162 million tonne wheat this time .
It is 17 million tonne more than the previous year .
Madhya Pradesh has received Krishi Karman award for the record production of last year .
In the national conference , the agricultural co-coordinator Dr . D N Sharma told that last year the figures of the land records of the commissioner were saying that there will be 127 million tonne production .
The production will reach 145 million tonne if crops come .
This time the agricultural department is estimating to produce 162 million tonne .
Sharma says that there isn ` t going to be much changes in the production because of winters and rains .
The agricultural development rate of MP receiving Krishi Karman award might be touching 19 % but the fresh report of the agricultural survey 2011-12 presented for the second time have raised questions on its speed .
The contribution of the farmers in the gross domestic product of the state has reduced as compared to the last seven years .
The production of important crops has also been recorded to be less than the national average .
The government claims that there has been phenomenal growth in the agricultural sector for the last few years .
The irrigation acreage has increased but the reduction in agricultural sector in GDP can become a matter of concern for the policy makers .
According to the report , the contribution of primary area -LRB- agricultural sector -RRB- in GDP in the year 2004-05 was 24.6 % which reduced to 21.5 % in the year 2011-12 .
While more than 70 % of the state ` s population is dependent on agriculture for its livelihood .
Despite this , no increase in its contribution in GDP is a thinkable issue .
For the government it is also a matter of concern that despite all efforts around 64 % of the land is still un-irrigated .
Although the irrigation resources have increased in the last years .
The top officers of the agriculture department also admit that small farms , dependence on rains , lack of irrigation facilities , less production , unavailability of cold chains , lack of good seeds and less and irregular electricity have become a hindrance in the progress of this sector .
Reduction in the size of farms : The size of farms in the sate has reduced in an alarming way .
The agricultural experts do not consider it to be a good sign for the state .
While the size of the average holding in the state in the year 2001-01 was 2.22 hectare , it reduced to 1.78 hectare in the year 2010-11 .
According to the survey there are only one % farmers in the state who have more than 10 hectare holding .
While around 72 % farmers have less than 2 hectare farms .
Farmers away from electricity : District level information has been made available in the agricultural survey .
If we look at the figures of the electricity department then there has been decrease in the use of electricity by the farmers in comparison to the last year .
In the year 200-6-07 there was 32.10 % electricity consumption in agricultural sector which reduced to just 31.445 in the year 10-11 .
There will be more reduction in the total sugar production of the country next sugarcane session beginning from October , 2013 .
The agriculture minister , sharad Pawar fears that in the next financial year the sugar production might remain 240 million tonne .
It can also affect the sugar prices .
In the current sugarcane session , the production is estimated to be 245-150 million tonnes .
In the last session 2011-12 -LRB- October-September -RRB- the sugar production remained 260 million tonnes .
Because of the less sugarcane production in Maharashtra the agriculture minister has feared this .
Pawar said that this time Maharashtra , the largest sugarcane producing state in the country has not yet started sowing sugarcane .
Perpetually for the second year there has been delay in sowing due to low rainfall .
The situation has worsened due to the state ` s decision to save water for drinking because it can create water crisis for crops .
In the current session , the situation of sugar production is good in other areas of the country except Maharashtra and Karnataka .
Because of the conversion of large amount of sugarcane into fodder in Maharashtra , sugar production has suffered a setback , while the situation in UP is better .
Recently , the food minister K . V . Thomas had estimated that the sugar production will increase up to 250 million tonne this year because of the better production in UP .
Initially the estimate was 245 million tonne .
In the first five months of the current session there has been 188 million tonne sugar production while there is no production in around 50 % sugar mills .
The wheat for Byawara district will be exported to Iran .
Like the previous year , this time also a cargo of 26 hundred quintal wheat will be sent to Iran .
It will first go through cargo train to Andhra Pradesh and from there it will reach Iran through ship .
Next cargo will go from Sarangpur .
In this cargo , the storage wheat from Sarangpur , Kurawar and Nrsinhgargh will be sent .
R.S. Solanki , the district manager of the MP state civil supply corporation has said that Iran has shown interest in buying it because the quality of wheat has come up to the international standards .
so far , nine thousand metric tonne wheat has been supplied to Iran from here .
The agricultural policies of the government are making the agriculture dependent on machines and genes .
While today there is much need for traditional farming in the country .
The government is neither learning lessons from the farmer suicides nor including the effects of climatic changes in agricultural policies .
These things were discussed in the national conference on ` national mission for perpetual agriculture ` subject organised in the constitutional club .
It was organised by the non-governmental organization Pairwi and Oxfam India .
Farmers , experts and policy makers from all across the country participated in this .
Dr. Ajay Kumar , the parliamentarian from JDF said that in order to develop agriculture there is need to revive the conventional water sources other than building small irrigation projects .
Rajeshwari Raina -LRB- NISTEDS -RRB- said that rather than paying attention to the agricultural situation , maximum production is being encouraged in NMSA .
The farmers can very soon get relief from the high prices of urea .
In order to keep a hook on the prices the central government is considering to fix the maximum retail price of urea fertilizers .
These prices will be separately determined on the basis of cost incurred on transportation in every state .
The fertilizer department irritated from the large scale growth in non urea fertilizer and subsidy bills is analyzing the current dink toll policy for non urea fertilizers .
According to the sources the fertilizer department had proposed a subsidy up to 25 % given on di ammonium phosphate , murite of potash -LRB- MOP -RRB- and single superphosphate -LRB- SSP -RRB- .
But this proposal was not accepted at the ministerial level .
The central chemical and fertilizer ministry wants to have a long time solution for the increasing subsidy bills and urea prices .
According to the sources , in this situation the current dink toll policy is being prepared afresh for the non urea fertilizers .
Under this the department will decide the maximum prices for fertilizers .
The fertilizer companies will not be able to sell fertilizers on the higher prices than this .
Further , there is a substantial difference in the prices of non urea fertilizers in the state .
On the basis of transportation cost , a little difference in the prices is correct to a certain extent but many a times it is more than this .
Some fertilizers have freight subsidy and others don ` t .
In such situations different prices of fertilizers are determined for different states .
Under the new policy the fertilizer producing companies can get up to 30 % on account subsidy .
Currently the drug companies get up to 85 % on account subsidy .
The fertilizer companies were provided the right to determine the retail prices of non urea fertilizers in April , 2010 .
Currently , a subsidy of 14,340 Rupees on DAP and 14,440 rupees on MOP respectively is being provided .
The department has made an arrangement for providing 5,000 billion rupees for the the payment of delayed subsidy on non urea fertilizers .
The central government is now going to get the patent of kharchia variety of wheat grown in the Kharchi region of Pali district .
This variety with qualities of irrigation with saline water and giving good yield in the country & abroad is being experimented in Australia for its gene reform .
Further , after the perpetual increasing demand for wheat , Kharchia variety of wheat is grown .
The wheat research directorate situated in Haryana has also developed several elevated varieties .
According to the scientists , Kharchia crop is grown in around half the agricultural land of Pali village .
Its irrigation is also carried with 60-70 % saline water .
On an average 2-2 .5 tonne Kharchia wheat is being obtained from the district .
Because of its unique color and taste , from Pali this wheat is reaching the local migrants living in foreign lands .
Subsidized manure and availability of electricity at cheap rates to increase the agricultural production at low cost has become the enemy of soil .
Because of the indiscriminate use of chemical fertilizers and excessive exploitation of underground water , not only the soil and become ill but it has also affected the level and quality of underground water .
The planning commission has objected this by pressurizing the agriculture ministry for making new policies for the lack of use of subsidized chemical fertilizers and cheap electricity .
According to a senior officer of the agriculture ministry , they are excessively used because of the subsidies obtained in manure and electricity in northern , southern and western states .
Punjab , Haryana , Uttar Pradesh , Maharashtra , Karnataka , Andhra Pradesh and TamilNadu are such states where the situation has reached a dangerous level due to its more use than what is actually required .
There is severe deficiency of nutritive elements in the soil and the quality has reduced to to the lowering of underground water level .
The officers say that in order to make agriculture cheaper the government has not only provided the farmers with subsidized manure and electricity but because of its cheap unavailability the farmers are using it more than their requirement .
But other are also exploiting it in the name of farmers .
Recently the union agriculture minister Sharad Pawar in one of his speeches said `` we ashould think about the mediums and methods of transformation which we are rapidly adopting `` .
The long term stability of agriculture is as important as reducing its cost .
Further , providing secure food to the population should also be our goal .
Pawar has certainly said a correct thing but with this he then kept backing the genetically amended food substances for growth and food security in production which not only seems to be opposing but to a certain extent irrelevant also .
This drama to encourage genetically modified crops for doubling food production has reached a comic level by holding conferences with biotech seed lobby .
All this is being done when in a interim report made by the technical expert committee made by the Supreme court and recommendations of Parliamentary standing committee on agriculture it is said that the government should keep ultra precautions for adopting such technologies .
In the report questions were also raised on its usefulness .
India has the biggest food grain granary of the world , worth around 667 million tonnes .
It is 2.5 times more than the decided government limit for buffer stock .
Despite this , food grains are not reaching the hungry .
Isn ` t this wrong .
Then on what basis the agriculture minister is speaking about the usefulness of those GM crops that are trapped in controversies all across the world .
Before this , the scientists have discarded that the food security and production level can eb increased through GM crops .
It brings two important issues before us - Production and development .
If we talk about production , then we have experience of Green Revolution and it has been a decade for the first GM crop , BT cotton in the country .
Today GM crops are being backed in a similar way as green revolution was presented as a panacea for food security .
But its consequences were never analyzed .
The indiscriminate use of agricultural chemicals i . e . fertilizers and insecticides have destroyed the natural asset i.e the fertility of soil .
It does not become a news that the agriculture production in the most fertile areas of the country is decreasing very fast .
The news does not also talk about those thousands of farmers and agricultural laborers who are suffering an epidemic like cancer behind the so called beautiful claims of revolution .
Similarly , when BT cotton was presented in the year 2002 , then the biotech seed industry who had developed this seed and the government encouraging it had made huge claims .
After a decade , ground reality speaks an altogether different story of these seeds .
There has been no significant growth in the cotton production in our country after the introduction of BT cotton .
The area under non BT cotton in the year 2004-05 was 94.6 % , then the average national production of cotton was 470kg and in 2011-12 when the area under total cotton cultivation reached 93 % of BT cotton area , then the average national production of cotton became 481 kg .
The effect on availability and diversity of seed is a different thing .
It is also a fact to be noted that today American seed producing company Monsanto controls the total cotton seed market .
The talks with the farmers across the country has made it clear that the farmers have been trapped in illusory advertisements .
Even if they want they can not leave BT cotton because now the non BT hybrid seed is not available .
The non BT cotton seeds have been moved out of the market in a conspired manner and what has remained has been polluted by BT gene .
It has also been mentioned in the layout of the 12th fifth year plan .
Rather than accepting its reality , our agriculture ministry seems to be encouraging the companies like ABLE and Monsanto who are looking for their benefits .
And finally there is no decrease in farmer suicides , which is a actual mirror of our agricultural policies .
Rather there has been an increase in the farmer suicides under BT cotton area .
All of these brings me near its science .
In a way we should consider farmers as the first scientists of agriculture .
Not like those who get certificates and degrees from the schools who remain away from the ground realities .
They are those scientists , who are testing and experimenting the indigenous wild species and have been distributing seeds and knowledge for years .
Today , the agriculture science being encouraged by the industries and speedily adopted by the governments seems totally opposite in its comparison .
Unfortunately it is inspired from an agenda of corporate profit .
The agriculture ministry and Indian agricultural research council should work for the benefit of farmers not against them .
And finally , most importantly our policies should save the livelihood of the farmers providing food to our country .
There has been increase in the availability of food grain in the country .
According to the central agriculture ministry there has been 6 % increase in it .
According to the current figures , now the per person everyday food grain availability in the country was 462 . 9gm .
Initially this amount was 437.1 gram per person per day .
Here the special thing is that for the last few years there has been steep decrease in the availability of food grains .
The government claims that this decrease has stopped now .
A major reason behind this growth is the fabulous production in states like Haryana , Punjab and Madhya Pradesh .
Rice , wheat , coarse grains and pulses come under the category of food grains .
According to the central agricultural minister Sharad Pawar , in the year 2011-12 , the per person food grain availability has been 462.9 grams while in the former year it was 437.1 grams .
In 2009 the per person availability of food grain was 444 gram , more than this but in 2010 there was a fall in it and it remained 437.1 gram per day .
In the year 2011-12 it set a record and increased to 25 billion , 93.2 million tonne .
In the former year the food grain production was 24 billion 44.9 million tonne .
Despite the increase in food grain availability the farmers of the country are facing problems like bad soil fertility , bad seed quality , lack of profit , lack of interest of youngsters in farming and reducing water productivity .
The situation of farmers was described by the director of Indian agricultural research institute -LRB- IARI -RRB- , Mr . H. S . Gupta himself during a program organised in Delhi .
Gupta asked the farmers that they should use modern agriculture technology for solving these problems .
He said that working in the same direction a new equipment has been developed to test the quality of soil .
This digital equipment apart from testing the quality of soil also gives information regarding right use of fertilizers .
The price of this digital equipment has been fixed keeping the condition of farmers in mind .
Among the gardening produces , there is no storage facility except potatoes .
Despite the government ` s announcement , the plan to open cold storage through private investment has failed .
The investors are not excited to build it since it is a non profitable work .
While there is huge difference in the demand and supply in this sector .
The country has cold storage worth only 3 billion tonne capacity while it requires storage worth 23 billion tonnes .
Because of expensive land prices and administrative carelessness , no private investment has come to cold storage .
While the government has made several attractive announcements to increase investment in this sector in the current plan .
The 25 % subsidy in cold chains has been increased to 40 % .
Yet there is doubt on the success of the plan .
Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal have maximum number of cold stores .
But the cost of storage is quite high since they are based on former technique .
In comparison to this the state governments have done no modification in the rent of these cold stores for the past three years .
Because of the expensive electricity and labor , around 100 cold stores have been shut in Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal .
Although the government has provisions for help to make the conventional cold stores modern .
Both these states have facilities for storing only potatoes .
Due to the perpetual downfall in the income from cold stores the investors are saving themselves from investing despite attractive encouragement .
The central government has formed a high level committee to establish cold stores .
The committee had recommended for building new cold stores with 12 million tonne capacity and modernizing conventional cold stores with 8 million tonne capacity .
In order to maintain the supply for onion round the year , there was a suggestion for building cold stores worth 1.5 million tonne capacity .
But these recommendations kept lying on shelves .
According to a fresh study report on cold store series by a major bank , this sector has immense scope and it is estimated that by 2015 this sector will have investment up to more than 40 thousand billion rupees .
According to the report despite several plans there are very weak conditions for investment in this sector .
The compensation for the burden on government treasure due to the freeing of sugar industry from control will be made by increasing the central excise duty .
The agriculture ministry has also supported this proposal by the food ministry .
There is a proposal to double the excise duty on sugar industry .
Sharad Pawar has agreed to the provisions on removing ban from this industry and increasing excise duty .
It will certainly lead to high sugar prices in domestic market .
In the annual meeting held by the Indian agricultural research council -LRB- ICAR -RRB- , agriculture minister Sharad Pawar said that the subsidized sugar provided to consumers under the ration system will not be expensive .
The government will buy sugar from open market for this .
There will be a economic burden of 3000 billion rupees on the government for this .
The central government will compensate this economic burden by increasing excise duty .
It has been mentioned in the cabinet note of food ministry .
In October , 2012 the chairman of Prime minister ` s economic advisory , C . Rangarajan has recommended to immediately remove the government control on sugar industry .
Sugar mill owners were angry for a long time due to two major bans .
They were demanding to remove the provision of 10 % levy tax on sugar and selling sugar in open market .
The sugar sold in ration stores is bought at 17 rupees and distributed at the rate of 13.50 rupees .
The third final estimation regarding the production of major crops grown in the country will be issued on 3rd April , 2013 .
It is estimated that in the third final estimation for the crop year 2012-13 -LRB- July-June -RRB- the total food production of the country will be 25.53 billion tonnes .
As per the figures issued by the central agriculture ministry , it is is estimated that in the third final estimation in the crop year 2012-13 the food production will increase from 50 million tonne to 25.53 billion tonne .
The increase in production of rice , wheat and coarse grains are responsible for this .
It is estimated that the wheat production of the country in the year 2012-13 will be 9.36 billion tonne while the wheat production in the year 2011-12 was 9.48 billion tonnes .
Among other rabi crops , mustard production would be 74 million tonne which is 73.6 million tonnes more the the crop year 2011-12 .
It is estimated that among other crops the production of coarse grains would be 3.95 billion tonne which is 4.20 billion tonnes more than the crop year 2011-12 .
It is estimated that the total production of oil seeds would be 3.07 billion tonnes which is 90 million tonnes more than 2011-12 .
It is estimated that soybean production would be 1.41 billion tonne .
Similarly it is expected that groundnut production would be 54 million tonne .
In a recently organized seminar , central agriculture and food processing minister , Sharad Pawar had said that it is essential to adopt scientific methods in order to bring increase in agricultural production .
He said that agricultural production can be increased by increasing the production of current sowing sector .
India needs to ascertain constant agricultural development seeing the availability of natural resources especially irrigated land .
Due to the farsighted vision of the government , hard work of farmers and the skilled direction obtained from the scientists , there is a perpetual increase in Indian agricultural production .
The farmers are made attracted towards conventional farming and gardening through national gardening mission .
It is not only increasing their lifestyle but also increasing food grain production .
For the past several years agriculture has evolved as a priority among the top priorities of the central and state government .
The governments confessed that we can not concertize the dream of green revolution unless we change the structure of agriculture .
That is why agriculture schemes are being implemented as per the changing structures of agriculture .
In fact during 1960s and 70s green revolution came due to new seeds , fertilizers and improved methods of agriculture which increased the production and changed the structure of agriculture .
While answering a question in the house of commons recently the agriculture minister agreed that changes in the structure of agriculture has increased food grain production greatly .
For the last two years the wheat production in the world has reduced up to around 3 hundred million tonne , while in India it is constantly increasing .
It is estimated that in the coming years it will increase up to 1 .
The government had announced a package worth 25 thousand billion rupees to achieve this target .
Farmers are made aware through this package .
Still India should remain alert by taking a lesson from China .
There is need to provide many more facilities to farmers than before .
Apart from making them aware they should be encouraged so that the dream of becoming number one in agriculture is achieved .
It will lead to many benefits because the population in India is also increasing with a fast speed .
Till today there are many countries in the world where food crisis has taken a horrible form .
Day after another there are violent incidents in these countries because of food crisis .
It is essential to maintain the interest in the production of these food grains so that we do not face such incidents .
Though nano technology and biotechnology have opened new doors of opportunities .
We can achieve the expected results in this decade by making biotechnology more mature .
By the year 2020 we shall be successful in achieving the size of fruits , color of flowers , amount of glucose in it , taste and fibrous crop as per our expectation .
The government also provided full support and efforts were made to provide cheap loans for all those facilities to farmers which were essential to promote agriculture .
The farmers were provided pump sets to tractors through loans .
Apart from providing agricultural equipment to the farmers they were also inspired to use improved seeds .
Campaigns such as `` Agriculture department on the door steps of farmer `` under the food security mission were run by various state governments .
Not only this , benefits are also being provided through manure and use of less water in barren lands .
Efforts are on in India to cultivate and grow more and more grains and save them as it is being carried in Israel and European countries using new techniques .
Investment in agriculture is encouraged through new systems like dry farming , more production with less water and drip irrigation .
It has particularly become more popular in deserted areas .
Marginal and small farmers have been benefited because of the minimum support price of the government .
Initially small and marginal farmers remained in huge dilemma regarding their produce .
Firstly they could not understand the correct prices of grains and secondly they were compelled to sell on whatever rate was told to them .
In this situation the government ` s announcement to minimum support price will now save the small and marginal farmers from selling it to the middle men .
Special emphasis is being laid on soil conservation to give new form to agricultural development in the country .
The ideological structure of soil conservation activities has changed .
Substantial reforms have been made in the concepts of these programs during every five year plans .
Once again the central government is undertaking a unique initiative in the direction of soil conservation .
Information are being gathered about the nutritive elements by testing the soil of every farm through agricultural department .
Further , farmers are being aware about soil conservation .
Things such as how we can use soil in a appropriate way and how soil can be conserved , how its strength can be conserved etc . are being explained to the farmers by the scientists .
Seed is the foundation and key mantra of cultivation .
High quality seed gives up to 20-25 % more produce than the ordinary seed .
Therefore pure and healthy seed is the foundation of good production .
That is why special care is being paid by the government on the quality of seeds .
On one hand sowing impure seeds leads to low production and on the other hand as a result of impure seed good seed is not obtained for future .
In this situation the farmers should use only certified seed at any cost .
Seed production should not be perceived from a farmer or scientist ` s view but with the eyes of a entrepreneur .
This is the reason on the initiative of the central government farmers are being provided breeding seeds , foundation seeds and certified seeds by various state governments .
Food grain production in the country is increasing rapidly .
Still the challenges have not ended .
In the direction of food grain production Green Revolution began under the leadership of the then Prime minister Indira Gandhi in 1960 in India .
Nobel Prize laureate Professor Norman Borlaug takes the credit of initiating Green Revolution .
With this it is intended to increase crop production by using hybrid and dwarf seeds giving more production in irrigated and un - irrigated agricultural areas of the country .
When there was news of wheat being kept for more than two years and consequently being rotten in the granaries of Punjab and Haryana was exposed then at the same time there were news of thousands of quintals food grain getting spoiled on Kolkata airport .
In this situation the most essential thing is to have adequate storage so that food grains are kept properly .
The rate of soil erosion in India is around 2600 million tonne every year .
This means it is very essential to save this soil .
Because despite all efforts so far India has only 40 % irrigated land .
The figures also say that around 71 million hectare land in the country is affected due to barren soil while in the entire world this figure is said to be around 9520 hectare .
The infertile soil is also required to be made cultivable .
Similarly in order to perpetually increase the food grain production in India , the government should make the land reform program active .
We can also give momentum to the food security through gardening .
Similarly by putting up projects such as grassland , fish rearing etc . work can be done in the direction of eliminating poverty by creating jobs .
Further , around 25.9 million hectare region in the country is affected from alkalinity .
This crisis is not there in a single state but in little parts of every state .
Reform programs should be carried in this direction also .
The situation of such soil can be reformed by cultivating potatoes , tobacco etc .
Through soil conservation we can not only increase the acreage under cultivation but can also be successful in increasing the grain of food grain production .
The contribution of agriculture and concerned sectors in the gross domestic product of the country is around 13-14 % .
Seeing the plight of food grain production , agricultural development has been prioritized in the first five year plan .
The first prime minister of the country Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru asked to put special emphasis on agricultural sector which can establish high level structure of agricultural research , agricultural expansion and agricultural education .
Without any delay schemes were made for the all round development of agricultural sector .
In 1958 , Indian agricultural research institute , Pusa , New Delhi was given the status of ` an honorary university ` .
Where provisions for agricultural education were made under the land grant system of America .
Further , new directions were given to agricultural research and its expansion .
The period between 1960-70 came up as a miraculous decade .
The first high level agricultural university was set up during 1960-70 in Pantnagar ` s Nainital district in Uttarakhand whose campus is expanded in around 16 thousand acre land .
Programs primarily concerning agricultural education , agricultural research and agricultural expansion were made in this university .
Further , path was set to open at least one agricultural university in every state of the country .
For this the entire credit goes to the first prime minister of the country Jawaharlal Nehru who laid the foundation of development and progress of agriculture and rural India .
The foreign wheat which was brought in India now was of extremely inferior quality .
During the same time the then prime minister of the country , Lal Bahadur Shastri gave the slogan `` Jai Jawan Jai Kisan `` .
During the same time the high yielding dwarf species of wheat had been brought to the country from Mexico for research .
These dwarf varieties of wheat were tested and also evaluated on the research farm of the Indian agricultural research institute , New Del .
Further , the possibilities of food security and food grain independence could be seen in India .
During 1962-63 the agricultural scientist and Nobel prize laureate Norman E . Borlaug carried tests on dwarf varieties of Mexican wheat along with Indian scientists on various research centers .
Due to the untiring efforts of Indian scientists , the high yielding varieties of wheat , Kalyan sona and sonalika were developed which remained popular in various states of the country .
Hence it was decided that the farmers will be provided these dwarf varieties very soon .
Further , agricultural technology should also be developed for these farmers .
The farmers of the country adopted this with a great fervor .
Pusa institute had a significant contribution in this great shift .
During this time the world popular agriculture scientist and former chairman of the national farmer ` s commission , Dr . M.S. Swaminathan became the guide of green revolution .
Pantnagar agricultural university and Punjab agricultural university also carried research work on dwarf wheat and developed several varieties .
The then prime minister of the country Mrs . Indira Gandhi initiated green revolution postal ticket in Pusa institute .
Dr. M . S. Swaminathan became the father of green revolution in India .
Recently , the great leader of green revolution Norman E . Barlog died at an age of 95 years on 11th September , 2009 .
He was awarded with Nobel prize for world peace in 1970 .
Along with the achievement of green revolution , research on other major crops also increased .
All India consolidated research projects were initiated in this regard .
The first project of this kind was initiated on maize crop .
In the middle of this decade special emphasis was laid on the development of non irrigated and dry areas .
During the last phase of this decade paddy-wheat crop system began .
Recommendations were made to adopt it in the irrigated areas of north India .
The biggest share of the total food grain production of our country comes from this crop system .
Further , the satisfying increase in agricultural production has improved the economic condition of the country .
Along with agriculture other occupations have also become active .
During the same time graduate and post graduate education in major subjects of agricultural science , encouraging agricultural expansion and agricultural research council were reorganized in entire India .
Dr. B.P Pal was elected the first director general of the newly formed council .
Recommendations were made to open new agricultural universities .
The outline of making agricultural expansion all the more effective was also laid at the end of this decade .
As a result it has been conceptualized to open an agricultural science center in every district .
Thus 1960 decade can be said to be ` a golden era of agricultural development ` .
Gradual growth was seen in food grain production till 1980 decade .
The main reasons behind this were dwarf varieties giving more production , balanced availability of fertilizers , irrigation management , proper use of chemical drugs for proper management of insects and diseases .
By the end of 1985 we were getting 86 million tonne paddy and 75 million tonne wheat production respectively .
During this time the total food grain production was 200 million tonne .
Adequate food grain was available in the granaries of Indian food council which was sufficient for facing natural calamities such as famine , flood , cyclone etc .
Further , the country got unprecedented success in the production of milk and milk products , fish rearing , flesh , fruits and vegetables production .
Natural resources such as air , water , soil , underground water also significantly contributed for all this .
During the same time production gradually decreased .
Under the paddy-wheat crop system the soil started showing loss of carbonic carbon and productivity .
Due to the inappropriate , unbalanced and indiscriminate use of chemical fertilizers signs of deficiency of some secondary and micro nutritive elements were being seen .
The farmers had started using more chemical fertilizers particularly nitrogen fertilizers to increase the productivity of crops .
Consequently the fury of diseases , insects and weeds increased in the farms .
Insects and weeds became chemical drug resistant .
Thus the problem of environment pollution occurred .
This problem automatically gave rise to various problems .
The agricultural scientists , subject experts and farmers became anxious with this .
Thus sustainable agriculture was emphasized to reduce environmental pollution .
Very soon research on sustainable agriculture began in various research centers of the country .
At the end of 1990s decade the former prime minister of the country strengthened the resolution ` jai jawan jai kisan ` by adding ` jai vigyan ` to it .
Thus research on sustainable agriculture had begun in the 1990s decade .
Crop diversification - Continuously growing a single kind of crop in agriculture and using a single kind of chemicals not only reduced the production of crops but downfall in their quality was also reported .
Single crop system is neither beneficial from economic point of view nor is it more beneficial from the perspective of circumstances .
Hence , along with paddy crops , pulse crops , gardening crops , fish rearing , cattle rearing and bee rearing was also adopted on the farm .
With this if the main crop got destroyed in any year then other agricultural occupation could be the source of income of the farmers .
Further , there is proper use of natural resources in crop diversification .
Crop diversification can also bring organic prosperity in the farm .
Conservation agriculture is a method of sustainable cultivation where without ploughing the farms or with less ploughing the crops are sown with the remains of the former crop through a special machine called zero till which maintains the moisture , soil conservation and environment .
Researches have proved that multiple ploughing neither provides any significant benefit to the farm nor there is any added growth in the crop production .
Rather despite high cost incurred the farmer gets low economic profit .
Zero tillage  conservation cultivation have proved to be useful in the economic development of the farmers and keeping the environment clean .
Fertigation - This word is a blend of fertilizer and irrigation .
Providing water along with fertilizers to the plants through drip irrigation system is called ` fertigation ` .
Through this method the water directly reaches the roots of plants rather than reaching the middle of plants .
Therefore less number of weeds grow in the crop .
Integrated water management - Because of the indiscriminate exploitation of underground water the water level is decreasing with a fast speed which is leading to problems like drying of wells , water supply , poisoning of water , salinity and increasing in cost of installing pumping sets .
Hence there should be maximum conservation of rainwater and reuse of running water by collecting them in reservoirs .
Research work is being carried on paddy thickness system for paddy crops where only 10-12 days old plants are planted and there is maximum saving of irrigation water .
The concept of integrated insect and disease management is an integral part of sustainable cultivation .
Under this along with chemical and organic drugs crop and systematic methods are also used to control insects which keeps the environment clean and increases production .
Huge success has been achieved in this direction by developing B . T . cotton providing its seed to the farmers .
Seeing the current scenario it is utmost essential to save the food grain and food items from the harmful effects of poisonous agricultural chemicals .
There is significant contribution of organic cultivation for taking good production of high quality crops and up-keeping the fertility of soil .
The prevalence of organic food is increasing day by day .
Today the future of organic cultivation of fruits and vegetables in many states of the country seems to be bright .
Ethanol has emerged as the most significant alternative organic fuel in the recent past years for reducing the high prices of mineral oils , their low availability and the pollution arising out of this .
It is mixed with petrol to make gasohol which completely leads to the combustion of fuel due to the presence of oxygen in it .
Consequently the emission of harmful elements gets reduced .
In India the organic fuel mission was started in the year 2003 .
The Indian government declared the organic fuel policy in September , 2008 in this regard which says that up to 20 % organic fuel will be added to mineral oils by 2017 .
The production of organic fuel is done through non edible oils like karanj , jatrofa , neem karadi and mahua .
Multipurpose trees such as jatrofa and karanj are being used as a source of non edible oils in our country to produce organic fuel .
These trees are being planted in less fertile , fallow and barren land .
Karanj has substantial capacity of conserving carbon .
Hence this tree is helpful in reducing environmental pollution .
There has been manifold increase in food grain production with the help of modern agricultural technology such as hybrid seeds , chemical fertilizers , insecticide and modern agricultural equipment in the past 65 years .
If we talk about potatoes then India is going to be the biggest potato exporting country .
On one hand the central government is providing protection to the farmers through various welfare schemes .
While their various problems are also being taken care of .
The effect of farmer credit card scheme which was run to save the farmers from the traps of moneylenders was visible at a larger level .
They were playing their significant roles in food grain production by getting manure and seeds on time .
On the other hand the government is also helping the people suffering loss in agriculture due to various reasons .
The farmers get more profit with less cost incurred through vegetable production .
On the other hand the people of the country are getting adequate nutritive vegetables to eat .
Amongst vegetables India has set a new record in potato production .
While the Bihar farmers have set a world record in potato production , the UP has been contituously increasing the acreage of potato sowing .
The annual potato production in the entire world in more than 30 billion tonne .
Most of the potatoes are grown in China .
Then comes Russia and India occupies the third number .
Currently half of the potatoes of the world are grown in less developed countries .
Most of the potatoes are eaten in Belarus .
The annual per person consumption of potatoes in the country is around 1712 kilograms .
The debt limit is determined without taking care of the debt repaying capacity .
