We are talikng about the popular Sarod player, Ustad Amjad Ali khan who has written a book named ` My father,over fraternity ` on his father sarod emperor Ustad Hafiz Ali khan.
The book has been issued in the second fortnight of December and its issuing time is also significant because 2012 was the 40th death anniversary of Ustad Hafiz Ali khan.
Ustad Amjad Ali khan says, `` It is special in one more way because there was no authentic literature on Abba until now `` .
Ustad Amjad ali Khan considers that there is significant contribution of his Sarod player sons Aman Ali khan and Ayan Ali khan in the writing of this book.
Ustad amjad ali khan is a musician of the sixth generation of the Bangash musicians.
His ancestors are known as the founders of Sarod.
His father Ustad Hafiz Ali khan innovated a new style of playing sarod by the nails of the fingers of his left hand.
Ustad Hafiz ali khan ` s early life and his musical personality has been illuminated in My father , over fraternity.
Ustad Amjad Ali khan honored with Padmashree in 1975, Padmabhushan in 1991 and Padmavibhushan in 2001 says that, this book contains many interesting and memorable talks of Abba.
As he was honored with Padmabhushan by the first President Dr. Rajendra Prasad in 1960 and when the honorable President asked Abba whether he can do anything for him, Abba presented a unique thing.
Raag Darbari has been composed by Tansen which was altered by people as per their wishes.
It speaks about his dedication towards music.
Ustad amjad ali khan says, `` Abba had taught me that music is not a profession.
It is a way of living.
Classical music requires patience, perseverance and meditation and we try to practice them in our lives.
A person who knows the values of a family, understands love and trust can only understand the true meaning of this book.
This was the reason why Ustad Amjad Ali khan chose Amitabh Bachchan for the release of this book.
He says,Bachchan Jee took care of his parents during their last days.
It reflects his versatile personality.
A sight of how exciting is the sight of a tiger roaming in a forest scenario could be seen in the ` Wild life ` painting exhibition organized at the Azad Bhawan.
Artist Geeta Bhatacharya has very beautifully drawn this scene of nature at the canvas.
The lively pictures of tiger in the exhibition were quite appreciated by the viewers.
Painters also like the wild animal known as the pride of zoo and that is why Geeta Bhatacharya depicting the wild life world has shown the tiger cubs playing.
The bright colors not only made these pictures beautiful but also showed the activities of the wild animals through this.
Many views of the nature amongst more than two dozen paintings have been put onto canvas.
The art lovers in this painting exhibition will get to see the attractive pictures of the wild life till 5th January.
Comedy is a serious business.
It is an age old saying but its hidden meaning was well understood on TV in the year 2012.
The new channel life OK assertively launched the stand up comedy show ` laugh India laugh ` with young contestants.
For this help was taken from the Pankaj Saraswat, the director of ` The great Indian laughter challenge ` . But it is said that everything changes with time.
While the show ` Comedy Circus ` telecast at Sony has strengthened its roots all the more.
Based on the grounds of Life ok star plus launched ` The great Indian comedy show ` with actors like Arshad Warsi and Shreyas Talpade but after the initial phase of TRP the show did not get a good response.
Sab TV that presents light entertaining programs has been successful in makes a space in people ` s heart through few comedy serials.
Musaddi lal, Karamchand Jasoos, Kalloomal Koylewala, Albert Pintoo, Mohandas B.A.LLB, Thekedar Tarneja.
These roles of Pankaj kapoor dominated his real name so much so that not only his admirers but his friends who had studied with him also entangled in these names that did not know they should call their buddy with which name.
He has full faith that the Mandola character of Pankaj Kapoor will increase the entanglement of his friends about his name.
Actually the title of the film is based on three characters.
Here Pankaj Kapoor as Mandola has played the role of Anushka ` s(Bijli) father.
According to Jagad Goyal the businessman of Tagore nagar who studied with him from class 9th till 11th During 1968-70 in Kundan Vidya Mandir situated in Civil lines, he used to call him as Pankaj in school but on screen he played his characters so beautifully that his many names became popular.
kwenzene vailis studying in the nursery school of America is just 9 years old.
This time Vailis has been nominated for the best actress in Oscar awards.
Vailis has been nominated for the lead role in ` beast of the southern wild.
It is the first film of vailis.
TV actress Urvashi Dholakiya has become the winner of reality show Big Boss of season-2.
Salman Khan the host of the show announced about Urvashi ` s victory on Saturday night.
The victory has fetched Urvashi a prixe amount of 50 lakh rupees.
Urvashi is the third woman candidate to win this show.
The social and political issues of the country are shaking the sensitive film makers.
The little knowledge about the left politics by the script writers and directors have made Maoists less significant.
A section of the viewers can laugh upon this but the film eventually is insensitive towards issues, movements and masses.
The landlord Mandola possessing the similar name as the village remains ruthless, exploiter and feudal during the day.
He has decided to turn the farms of his village into mills and industries by aligning with the state chief minister.
The farmers fight for saving their lands where according to Maoist Tung he is being directed.
The satire will make the viewers laugh while the agitation of the Maoists is an aspect of the ruthless truth of the country.
Actually most of our film makers try to cast a local story taking the artifact of the overseas film makers.
Not putting the local saying into the right scenario of historical, social and political context leads to the scrambling of truth, imagination and thinking.
This scrambling is somewhat more in ` Matru ki bijli ka mandola ` .
Pankaj kapoor and Shabana Azmi are proved actors.
Ordinary scenes are made extra ordinary by them.
Imran khan and Anushka sharma do not seem very effective amongst them.
The songs and music of Vishal Bharadwaj ` s movies are very vigorous, sweet and melodious.
The satirical dialogues and loud scenes of the film are seductive.
If this sustainability was there throughout the movie the definitely the entertainment would have been more.
Ranbeer kapoor who has become the youth icon is also active on small screen along with the big screen.
The viewers shall see his dance performance on TV on 19th January.
His film ` Barfi ` has been nominated for the 17 various categories of this award.
Ranbeer will also perform with mother Neetu Kapoor for the first time.
Ranbeer says that, ` I want to perform with all the members of my family alternately on this occasion.
Ranbeer further says that the award ceremony this time in many terms is special for the film society and film lovers.
Hindi cinema is celebrating its 100 years.
This ceremony is dedicated to that.
I will dedicate my performance to late grandfather Rajkapoor, Shammi kapoor and shashi kapoor.
The awards cultivate a feeling of self confidence inside me that whatever I am doing is correct.
I am very happy that once again after ` Rockstar ` my film has received a lot many awards.
` Life of Pi ` made in Indian background with Indian characters like Irfan, Tabboo and Suraj Sharma has been nominated in 11 categories of the 85th Oscar awards.
The lullaby of Pi in the film has got a place in the category of best original songs of Oscars.
This lullaby is written by the Indian musician Bombay Jayshree Ramnath.
Everybody in India is hoping from him this year.
It is remarkable that Gulzar(song) and Rahman(music) had won the Oscar award for the best original song in 2008 for ` Jai ho ` .
Michael Dana has given the music for this lullaby and it has also been nominated for the best original score.
Oscar awards are given by the Academy of motion pictures and sciences of America every year.
This year these awards shall be distributed on 24th February.
Pi is such a character who lives in my neighborhood and also in your locality.
Pi is a symbol who makes his own way, searches for his shore himself.
All of us struggle in the passion of living life.
After watching ` Life of Pi ` on screen, any viewer can call it to be a magical film.
But I think that this film lets us meet the witching of life.
Such a witching which not only associates with the ups and downs of Pi ` s life but leads every person to a turning point from where he cannot find a way to head forward.
It is a big thing for me to be associated with this film but playing the the role of an adult pi was no less than a challenge.
I watch less of Hindi films and more of Hollywood films.
Ang lee has been amongst the list of my favorite directors.
I could surmise from the script of the film that Ang lee is once again making an amazing film.
As far as I have understood his direction style amazes the audience.
He looks at the entire universe with a different and new perspective.
Others do not possess such an understanding and art of cinema making.
According to our director Ang lee I not only had to show Pi on screen.
After doing the film I can even say that this story lets us understand the meaning and motive of strong wish in a true way.
The film tells that the difficult situation do not change unless we change our thinking.
As you start perceiving in a new way, the situation changes.
It is the biggest philosophy of life.
It is a global film that begins from Pondichery and finishes at Canada.
And it can be a story of anyone in the world.
` Life of Pi ` starred with Indian artists has aroused a hope this year to get the most prestigious Oscar awards of the film world.
This film has been nominated in 11 categories.
The Indian singer Bombay Jayashri has been nominated jointly with Canadian musician Michael Daina in the original song category for this film.
He is the only Indian who has been nominated for the awards this year.
It is a moment of joy for the Indian music.
It is a common lullaby and comes from the heart of a mother.
There is no problem with the language because its realization is infinite.
Jayshree has shared her experience of work with lee on her facebook page.
He said that talking about his expectation over lullaby Lee had said that the child does not sleep because he is sleepy.
He sleeps because he feels himself to be secure.
Jayashree who was associated with classical music for a long time had a successful career in play back singing.
A. R. Rahman who has received Oscars for the film slum dog millionaire has congratulated Jayashree on tweeter for the nomination.
Oscar awards shall be distributed in the Dolby theater of Hollywood on 24th February.
Baba Harivallabh musical summit organized continuously for the past 137 years in the Devi pond of Jalandhar city of Punjab is the most old and historical one in the country.
The scholar of sanskrit Swamy Tuljagiri has a significant contribution in establishing and sustaining the tradition of Bhakti sangeet in Dhrupad art of the popular saint Harivallabh.
Bhakti musical concert was started being organized on the first death anniversery of Baba in 1875 to pay him a tribute.
Bhakti stream started on the shrine of Baba with the carols and songs of the saints along with the holy rituals and yajna.
Then this ceremony had begun with the name musical fair.
Later it was named as Baba Harivallabh musical summit.
The festival that continues till three days from morning till late night has singing and instruments playing presentations by countless leading and talented young artists.
Harivallabh musical competition has also been initiated for cultivating a inclination towards traditional music amongst the young generation.
The summit this time was dedicated to the recently deceased Namdhari satguru Jagjit singh maharaj and Pandit Ravishankar.
Young Utsavlal presented the Raag vihaag in pure form on western instrument piano.
The presentation of raag bageshri was common.
He began singing with serious nature and big raag darbari.
It seemed by hearing that he is just fulfilling the formalities.
Bhai Baldeep singh is the representative of the flourishing tradition of Gurvani oratorio principle in Dhrupad.
He is the 13th generation carrier of this tradition.
He started singing in Raag Shuddha vasant from Kabir bhajan.
The fifth Indian theater festival is beginning from 5th January where the theater lovers will get to see the top most plays.
In the festival continuing till 20th January this time on the occasion of the birth anniversary of famous dramatist Sadat Hassan Manto 6 plays based on his works shall be presented.
This information was given by Anuradha kapoor the director of the national school of drama and Amal alana the chairman in a press conference.
Apart from this a complete blend of various languages, styles and idioms can be seen the plays in the festival.
While many small plays shall be staged under the Indian panorama.
The plays of the great dramatist like Rabindra nath tagore, sadat hasan manto, william shakespeare shall be staged on the occasion.
While plays based on the poems of Faiz Ahmad Faiz, Aga Shahid ali and Madhusudan Dutt shall also be shown.
The 15th international theater festival of the national school of drama(NSD)shall begin in the capital from 5th January.
The festival known as the Mahakumbh of Asian theater has given a special place to Sadat hasan manto and Indian public theater.
Along with this the theater lovers will get to see the plays based on the works of William Shakespeare.
It will begin with the Vinay sharma directed play ` Aatmakatha ` on Saturday.
Where Kulbhushan Kharbanda will be seen on theater after a long time.
Sadat hasan manto has been given special place as a tribute on the year of his birth anniversary.
Six plays based on his work shall be presented.
NSD ` s chairman Amal Alana told that this time 67 out of 87 plays are from India.
18 plays are in foreign category from which seven are from SAARC countries.
During the last October many film makers like Aparna Sen , Oneer , Ashutosh Gowarikar awarded with national film festival had jointly sent a petition to the information and broadcasting ministry where majorly the presentations of free film makers and the problems in their distribution was discussed and a request was made to the government for considering this issue.
According to the sources, the officers of the information and broadcasting ministry have asked these film makers that in the initial days of December Manish Tiwari shall seriously discuss in detail on this issue and shall also consider the suggestions.
When asked about the major demands of the film makers, a film maker said that the major demand will be that the Central government should help in building such non professional mini theaters where only independent and low budget films are shown.
A group of representatives of the film makers shall also put a demand before the information and broadcasting ministers to spend a part of the money on the construction of mini theaters from the amount that the government has fixed for the ceremonies organized on the occasion of the completion of 100 years of cinema because the small films do not get cinema halls these days.
The 82 years old director M. S Sathew who became popular after making ` Garam Hawa ` says that parallel cinema or new wave cinema could not be possible without the support of the government.
Government institutions like NFDC and Doordarshan have contributed a lot towards this.
The Hollywood film ` Life of Pi ` made under the direction of Ang Lee has been nominated in 11 categories of Oscars.
They include the categories of Best film and best director.
Indian stars have played lead roles in the film.
In the ceremony organized here on Thursday the nominations of the 85th Oscar awards were announced.
According to this Steven Spielberg ` s film ` Lincoln ` has been nominated in the 12 categories pf Oscar awards.
` Silver linings playbook ` starring Anupam kher has been nominated in 6 categories.
The American film ` Zero dark thirty ` made on the campaign related to kill Osama has been shot in India.
This film has also been nominated in the category of best films.
After the family serials that ruled the heart of the people for decades now it is the time for talent shows.
All the channels are coming up with every kind of talent shows.
While ` KBC ` is making the contestants millionaire and billionaire those who are doing well in other talent shows are getting good work in TV and films.
The ` master chef ` of star plus, ` DID ` and ` DID lil champs ` of zee TV, ` Indiaz got talent ` of colors and ` comedy circus ` of Sony rocked a lot in the new season.
The channel life ok mere an year old also tried its luck in the talent show.
A special series of ` Hindustan ke Hunerbaaz ` was started.
` Surkhetra ` is running on Sahara 1 these days.
According to the channel head of Star plus, the viewers associate themselves with such shows.
The phase of talent shows shall continue further.
We are supposed to bring a third season of ` master chef ` in the series this year.
The second season of ` Satyamev Jayte ` shall also be brought soon.
The fiction head of zee TV says that such shows are vibrant in every phase.
People like to see interesting shows on the incidents that are are happening in the country. ` Saregamapa ` has reached its 18th year.
People are liking it a lot in this season also.
The various seasons of ` DID ` and ` DID lil champ ` also had the same condition.
Very soon we are coming up with a new talent show ` India ` s best dramebaz ` .
Here children ranging from 5-12 years shall showcase the talent of their acting.
Many actors of the small screen have said a good-bye to the serials this year.
Talking about this, the script writer of ` Balika vadhu ` purnendu shekhar says that despite the fact that the small screen has become large today , the attraction of the films is pulling the TV actors towards it.
The biggest shock was given by Barun sobti.
He went to earn name in the film world leaving the star plus show ` Is pyar ko kya nam du ` ?
Ram Kapoor from ` Bade acche lagte hai ` and Shivaji satam i.e ACP Praduman of ` CID ` which is running since one and a half decade want to say a good bye to their shows.
They will been back to back in three films this year.
Very soon his next film ` Mere dad ki maruti ` will be released.
While Shivajee is showing interest in Marathi films.
There is also a rumor that Pratusha Banerjee who has acted as Anandi in the serial Balika vadhu of colors is also getting offers for films.
If we talk about people before him then sushant singh rajput who became popular in each and every home with the role of Manav in Pavitra Rishta left his high innings and went to New York.
His next film ` Ki po che ` is releasing next year in February.
He is in the lead role in the film.
Its director is Abhishek kapoor who made a hit film like ` Rock-on.
Anoop Soni, the anchor of crime patrol says that the thinking of film makers has changed.
TV artists are also given preferences.
Television has given many top-notch artists to the films earlier also.
Whether it is Shahrukh or Irfan khan.
It is a good thing for small as well as big screen.
Both of them might be different mediums but the motive is only entertainment of viewers.
A new experiment is being done in the TV world of India this year.
The second season of colors serial ` Na bole tum na maine kuch kaha ` will begin from 14th January.
The show will return with a new twist and turn in the story of Megha and journalist Mohan.
Jayashree Venkatraman shall play the role of adult nanhi.
She ` ll also be on the way of becoming a journalist.
` Sasural genda phool ` fame artist and TV anchor Jay soni is coming up on television with this show.
It is the popular crime thriller show of America.
Anil kapoor is coming up with its Indian version.
It will be telecast on colors.
It will be the first Indian version of some international thriller show.
It has been directed by Delhi belly fame Abhinay Dev while the script is written by Rensil De ` silva.
` Tota weds maina ` is the new show of Sab TV which is popular for its light comedy shows.
` FIR ` fame Kavita kaushik shall play the role of Maina while Gaurav gera will play the role of Tota.
Tota and Maina are husband-wife but their behavior is extremely opposite to each other.
One is stiff while the other is mellow.
Their love story shall be shown in the show.
Its telecast date has been fixed to 14th January.
There was a rumor about Ram kapoor that from television he is turning towards films but life ok has convinced him to play a longer inning of television.
He ` ll host the game show ` welcumbaji mehman nawazi ` based on cooking.
Now star plus is coming up with the third season of master chef in order to give a platform to cooking lovers.
This time the celebrity chef Sanjeev kapoor has been included here as a judge.
Along with him Vikas khanna and Kunal kapoor will also test the talent of contestants by being the judge.
Both of them have become the judge during last days.
The show will be telecast from February.
Zee TV is giving more preference to fiction instead of non fiction shows.
Its upcoming presentation will be the talent show ` India ` s best dramebaz ` .
Here the teen age children shall showcase their acting.
These days there are rumors of including Hrithwik dhanjani acting as Arjun in Pavitra Rishta in its panel of judges.
Apart from them new versions of ` Sherdil Shergil ` and ` Mahabharata ` are coming up on Star plus.
Bindas will come up with season 4 of Emotional Atyachar.
The announcement of ` Sajan ` on sony TV is also possible very soon.
There are also rumors that actress Simi Garewal will be back on TV very soon with her talk show.
The heroic star of the battlefield of entertainment Ranbeer kapoor is bold and spontaneous.
From the journey of ` Sawariya ` till ` Barfi ` Ranbeer kapoor has consistently proved that he is capable and able to face the new challenges of acting.
We see the creative courage and success of Ranbeer kapoor in every film.
It is natural for the viewers to recall Sanjeev Kumar and Kamal Hassan looking at his performance in ` Barfi ` .
Without speaking a single word deaf and dumb Barfi with his thoughtfulness and sweetness of humane enraptured the viewers.
Recently the diplomats of the entire world appreciated the telecast of this film in UNO.
The successor of kapoor brood Ranbeer has remarkably maintained the tradition of great grandfather , grandfather and father.
He clearly says that I have not come into films for name and money.
I have inherited both of them.
I only need work... films and different films.
The serials based on mythical stories have sustained a different status in the present phase of reality, talent and serials based on true incidents.
The charming image of baby Ganesha with Shiva and Parvati is alluring the viewers these days in ` Devo k dev mahadev ` on Life ok.
Mohit Raina as lord Shiva in ` Devo k dev mahadev ` says that lord Shiva has all the qualities that people find in their personalities.
Shiva momentarily gets angry and becomes happy.
He confesses after committing mistakes.
Humans also behave in the same way.
Thus people are able to connect with the role.
It is the reminder of content like grand set, fantasy and the victory of good over evil that is pulling the viewers of all the ages towards it.
The educational stories of these serials inspire children and youngsters while the elders get their dose of spirituality.
Mythical stories are a part of human consciousness.
India is a god fearing country.
Here people like to hear and narrate such stories.
Crores of serials are being made among which mythical serials are also alluring people.
Prem sagar the director of ` Jay Jag Janani ma Durga ` on the issue says that as air is unavoidable for life likewise we cannot live without faith and religion.
I believe that the regime of such shows had never ended.
According to the trade pundits of television the books on spirituality are also being sold in large numbers because of which a section of such viewers has got ready.
After ` The immortals ` of Ameesh, ` Sacred of nagaz ` is also being quite appreciated by the people.
Thus these books have prepared a new market for the religious serials.
Astha, Sanskar and other channels are fulfilling the left scope of building the market.
For three to three and a half years I remained the assistant director in yash raj films.
I was associated with his film ` mujhse dosti karoge ` .
Then I decided that I should initiate as an actor.
I was 21 years old then.
Everybody talked nicely that he is Mukesh jee ` s grand child, looks good.
But nobody offered work.
Then one day I met Jhamu Sugandh jee in a party.
I did not recognize him by face.
The person who had made films like ` lagaan ` , ` rangeela ` was standing before me.
The next day when I reached his office then he handed me over the script of two films.
One was ` Johny gaddar ` and the other was ` jane tu ya jane na ` and told me to read them say which one I wanted to do.
I have a habit that I make my every script to be read by my mother.
The next day I met Jhamu jee and told him that I ` ll do ` Johny gaddar ` .
Then suddenly one day he gave me 51 thousand rupees and a packet of sweets and said that we are shooting from tomorrow.
The first shot that I gave was of a clinic where I ask for chloroform.
My first dialogue in the film was, ` Excuse me, can I get chloroform? `
The renowned actress of the past Rekha ` s film khoobsoorat is considered as one of the memorable films.
Since it is the regime of remakes the magic of this film had to be exploited.
Thus the announcement of the remake of film khoobsoorat was made.
Here Sonam kapoor is taken at Rekha ` s place.
It is doubtful that the film khoobsoorat will be made in such a situation.
Sonam says that she want to understand the character well so that she can make it lively.
While it is obvious for Rekha to do this.
Because Rekha ` s name is associated with this film.
Since the phase of remakes was at its peak last year, in the coming years the phase of sequels will be at its peak.
This year the legendary director producers of Bollywood are in a preparation to carry forward the story of their films released earlier or to come up with their sequels.
Apart from this the sequel of the film Sahib bibi or gangster appreciated as a good film with small actors in 2011 shall also appear.
The sequel of hate story, hate story-2 of the bhatt camp is also ready.
Amongst all these Ashiqui-2 as a sequel surprises.
It is the sequel of the film ashiqui in 1990 made under the bhatt camp starring Rahul Roy.
The brand value of all these films is so good that for most of the films the film trade analysts are announcing the expected turn over to cross 100 crores.
It is also expected that Dhoom-3 and Krish 3 shall cross the business of 200 crores.
It does not seem that the analysts are exaggerating.
The reason is that big stars like Hrithik and Amir are associated with some of the films.
From 2013 the phase of prequel films might also start in Bollywood.
While Salman khan has also announced the third series of his film Dabang as a prequel.
To tell the truth, the potential of giving strong prequels can be seen in many big films.
Kai po che of Abhishek kapoor who also made the film rock on will be released.
While Neeraj Pandey who gave wonderful film like ` A wednesday ` will come up with ` special 26, a film of the category of action and crime.
Remo Desouza who became a famous choreographer with the film ABCD will step into direction.
It is said to be Bollywood ` s first dance based film.
Although many new trends , personalities came into the spotlight, some of the old celebrities made history in 2012
While the year 2011 began with the rumor 100 crores of business for films, by the end of the year the next milestone of business through films is estimated to be 200 to 400 crores.
The film Ek tha tiger released this year by making the total income of 185 crores made the milestone of 200 crores easy.
After this with Ek tha tiger it reached to 200.
Now Akshay kumar says, the day is not far when our films shall make a business of 400 crores.
By working in offtrack films like English Winglish she has proved that the actresses who have crossed the age of 50 can also make a strong retreat.
Sridevi also set an example of trying a new kind of cinema for the heroines who are making a comeback.
Model Diana penty of Kingfisher calender made her debut as a homely girl in cocktail movie and amazed everybody.
Diana broke the notion that the girls of modeling world do not fit in the character of traditional roles.
Huma Qureshi came into the list of ` fat heroines ` like Vidya Balan, Parineeti Chopra and sonakshi Sinha.
Despite a huge figure viewers liked this actress a lot and thus inn 2012 zero figure proved to be zero.
Anurag Kashyap is known as his different styles in direction.
He made his film Gangs of Wasseypur in two parts.
Both of them were released at different times.
Women directors dominated in 2012.
Reema Kagati ` s Talash and Gauri Shinde ` s English Winglish were appreciated for best direction.
The stunning appearance of suspense thriller films began with the film ` Kahani ` this year.
Then Amir Khan ` s film Talash also served something new different from comedy and action.
Films like Raj-3 and 1920 evil returns served something different from the action and tiring comedy.
For the sake of remake the film producers this year turned their attention towards regional cinema.
Now the focus is also on Punjabi films along with south Indian films.
This year Kareena got married to Saif ali khan in October and Vidya Balan married UTV head Siddharth Roy kapoor in December.
The song of korean pop singer Gangnamam made a boom on internet this year because of its special dance style.
While Priyanka chopra released the title track ` in my city ` the solo song of her album on internet.
Apart from being in rumors for time and again delaying the release of his film Talash for Dhoom-3, he was also in rumors for his debut show Satyamev jayate on television.
Thus he laid the foundation of a new celebrity work of ` Socialtainment ` .
Lets talk about Teesri kasam the third film of Shailendra jee through his letters.
Shailendra, who made this film and composed the song passed away few years after the release of this film.
Vitthal Bhai patel was so associated with the film Teesri kasam during its production as if he was himself producing the film.
The production of the film took more than four years.
Whatever is not discussed about Teesri kasam through these letters is also essential to discuss.
The troubles that he had to suffer during his only film could be disclosed either be shailendra himself or Dinesh his father dedicated son.
These days Dinesh jee who is known more as Bablu jee is making a two hour documentary film about the life of Shalendra jee ` s life.
Alongside his two books are ready for being published.
Bablu jee had also come for the 21st May program of Vittthal Bhai in Sagar.
Amir ` s first film in three years was Talash.
It did a business of 65 crore rupees on the first week itself in the entire country.
But its total income restricted to just 11 crores in the second week.
Khiladi 786 of Akshay kumar released last week was even worse.
The film Jab tak hai jaan of shahrukh-kareena in the third week fell down to 84 percent and was just 2.5 crores.
For being the last film of Yash Chopra, the king of romantic films, this film was expected to did a record break performance.
While the income of Ajay Devgan ` s home production Son of sardar released on the same time fell down to 82 percent and became 2.75 crore in the third week.
Generally films make most of the earning in the first week itself.
Salman khan ` s film like Dabang and Ek tha tiger did a business of more than 40 crores in the first day itself.
Amir khan is known for doing different kind of films.
People impatiently wait for his films.
The 54th national art exhibition will be organized by the lalit art academy in Agartala.
The function will be held from 17th December to 6th January.
It will be inaugurated by Manik Sarkar the chief minister of Tripura.
Amongst the 8047 received art forms by 3185 artists of the country, 124 have been chosen for the exhibition.
It also includes the art forms of 10 national award winners of this year.
It is a matter of joy that the exhibition to be organized in Agartala has received comprehensive support of the art world.
This year there is a scope for India to get an Oscar award.
Indian Karnataka music singer Bombay Jayashri has been nominated with Michael Diana in the category of the best original song.
Jayashri is considered to be the best Karnataka music singer of the world.
The film ` Life of pi ` begins and ends with the lullaby written and sung by her.
The lullaby is in Tamil.
The film has been nominated in 11 categories.
Three day Indian classical and folk dance festival began from Saturday.
In the three day Indradhanush dance festival organized in Azad Bhawan artists were seen learning Indian dance not only in the country but also outside it.
The purpose of the festival held till 14th January is to provide a national-international stage to the talented youngsters.
The artists participating range from 18-35 years of age.
The festival was started with a seminar whose topic was ` The impact of classical dance on the youth and young professionals and their mutual relationship and existence.
After this the colorful dance festival began where Sarita Mishra ` s Odisi dance and Sohini ray ` s Manipuri dance were presented.
Padmashree guru Jaya Ramarav and Vanashree were awarded with guru honor award on the occasion.
Gen Suresh kumar hoyala and Guru kanak sudhakar the directors of ICCR inaugurated the festival by lighting lamp.
94.3 My Fm has won five golden awards right at the beginning of the year.
400 entries had for the golden mike awards.
My FM was nominated for the maximum of 10 categories.
My FM has received the award of excellence in radio before this.
Last year My FM had won four awards in golden mike.
A meeting of high level committee was held on Wednesday with a view to sort out the Padma award names.
It is being pointed that after death the superstar Rajesh khanna might be given the Padma vibhushan award for the second biggest citizen of the country.
The government sources said that apart from Rajesh khanna, Ramesh sippy the sholay fame and the famous film director might be given the Padmashree.
The names of the people receiving the award shall be announced on 25th January 2013 after the permission of Prime minister Manmohan singh.
Generally Padma awards are not given after death but the government can look at Rajesh khanna ` s matter with a different view and can award him with Padma vibhushan exceptionally.
James cameroon ` s 3D film Avtaar that came three years back became the film with the most income.
Nick Noland who is into the field of photography for the past 30 years in Britain has seen many ups and downs in cinema.
He says that the 3D films are unable to provide a good viewing experience to the audiences.
Nick says that he has not met a photography director yet who is enthusiastic about 3D.
British cinematographer Oliver Stapleton believes that 3D films are unable to connect emotionally to the viewers.
The viewers eyes are unable to build a consensus with 3D in the cinema.
Although Nick and Oliver agree that 3D technology can be helpful in films like Avtaar.
But nobody can present the serious drama through that medium the way James Cameroon did.
Ang Lee the director of the recently released film ` Life of Pi ` believes that the intelligent use of 3D has made its place.
China alone has more than 10,000 3D cinema halls.
This number is 1/4th of the total cinema halls of the world.
Watching such films at one place upsets us that what is the relevance of their production.
The protagonist (Leander pace) boards Rajdhani express by stealing his friends ticket.
He behaves bizarrely with his co passengers.
Banerjee(Priyanshu Chaterjee) speaks a lot, Manish(Sudhanshu Pandey) is a fashion designer.
Bollywood ` s item girl is also on the same coupe.
When Keshav takes his bag and goes to the washroom head TT Satyam sharma(Gulshan grover) and attendant think that there is bomb in his bag.
Jimmy drinks tea on the tables of railway headquarters and remains worried.
Leander pace is the protagonist of the film but his expressions are better in tennis court rather than the big screen.
Sudhanshu Pandey is ineffective in acting.
A gazal of Asadulla khan ghalib has been used in the film but because of the loose picturization the influential dialogues are ineffective.
The story of the film is scattered.
Rajeev Khanelwal presents ` Sach ka samna ` on TV.
In the film ` Table number 1 ` he is in the role of guest instead of being a host.
He has to give the reply of 8 questions and with every question he has to complete a task.
The only condition is that one does not have to speak lies.
Rajeev khandelwal plays this game with vivaan biwi siya(tina desai)which is seen by crores of people of the world simultaneously.
` In table number 21 ` along with truth there is little bit of Fizi country, little bit of romance and a little bit of entertainment.
Vivan and riya have got married after five years of friendship.
They entertain after reaching Fizi.
While he gets the invitation of being the guest of table number 21 by Khan, the owner of the resort.
Here answering 8 questions can make us win 21 crore rupees.
The third and fourth question of the game start revealing the hidden truth of his personal life.
Despite his usual acting Rajeev khandelwal cannot handle the film.
Paresh Rawal has a peculiar getup.
He has not played his role seriously.
Although Tina desai ` s attempt of acting is good.
Despite giving a message and being purposeful the film does not satisfies in the last impact.
Juhi Parmar won the title of the show Bigboss-5 of colors.
Rajsmita of Odisha became the winner of the popular reality show Dance India Dance season-3 of Zee Tv.
Ekta kapoor has got the best fiction award for her Sony ` s show ` Bade achhe lagte hai ` for the TV category in Ficci award and actress Sakshi Tanwar has got the award for the best actress.
World ` s shortest woman Jyoti amo was in rumors for participating in the reality show Bigboss-6.
Pakistani performer Veena mallick got a setback because of the closing of Imagine channel.
The long awaited wedding of the cinema world was held in a peaceful environment.
The most discussed couple of Bollywood Kareena kapoor and Saif ali khan did court marriage before the family members.
Alka Teemar famous as the golden girl and an international woman wrestler married Anup Bhati.
Actress Genelia De ` souza got married to actor Ritesh Deshmukh.
The direction of the film Rajdhani Express produced under the banner SLA impact pvt.ltd. was a big challenge for Ashok kohili because through this tennis star Leander pace was stepping into acting world for the first time.
Now it will be considered the reckless effort of the director that along with direction he took the responsibility of script writing and dialogues.
In the film it has been tried to point the hollowness between the rich and the poor but it could not become possible because of useless narration.
Keshav is the central character of the film who is engaged in an ordinary work at a weapons trader.
He is a true lover but he does not have adequate money.
The beloved also leaves him when he does not have money.
He takes the ticket of Rajdhani Express to go to Mumbai but here also because of economic disparity he is discriminated.
Towards the end of the film the black tin of minister ` s doings, police ` s iniquity and media ` s aspirations are opened.
Because of the scattered story the writer has not been successful in emitting its message.
Even though Leander pace might have dreamt of becoming an actor since childhood but the truth is that he does not even know the ABCD of acting.
Despite getting training from Anupam kher ` s acting school Pace was not seen to be influential in any of the scenes.
Arbaz khan holding the responsibility of direction for the first time has once again presented the known style of his elder brother Salman khan.
The villain seems to be big in Dabang-2 but actually he is not.
He has not been presented as a challenge.
All the hard work has been put for Salman khan.
From Lalganj Chulbul Pandey has come to the Bajariya police station of Kanpur city.
Maintaining law and order in the city and running charitable trust from a share of the acquired money.
Considering his mother ` s wish Chulbul Pandey has started taking care of his father and brother.
Dabang-2 has all the spices of entertainment but they have not been stirred properly.
Because of this there are different tastes of entertainment in different scenes of the film but there are no tastes remembered after leaving the theater.
Last time scenes were put into the thread of story, this time there is no attempt of binding the scenes.
Actually there is no thread in the story.
The film has many absurdities.
Green screened radios in the age of mobile... It seems it is two decades back of TV channels arrival.
The unhesitating use of commercial products in scenes and songs is jarring.
Apart from Salman khan there is no attempt of raking up any of the artists and characters in Dabang-2.
There is repetition in the acting , style and dialogues of the villain Prakash Raj.
All the artists including sonakshi sinha are ineffective.
In the spicy films of 1980-90 there were big clash and dialogue delivery between the protagonist and the villain.
There absence is felt.
Series of such films have become just a scrape of the spicy films of the mainstream films.
The possibility of Dabang-3 has also been indicated.
Recently a book named `` Mohammad Rafi-My abba `` by Yasmeen khalid the daughter in law of Mohammad Rafi ` s has been published.
While reading the book I witnessed such incidents which I could not stop myself sharing with you.
It is obvious that if a member of the family is narrating something most of that would be personal talk.
Rafi Sahib was a person with sufi nature so he did not agree with this talk.
He believed that once the fees for song is received it is inappropriate to ask for anything.
As a consequence of the fight the matter grew so much that both of them stopped singing together.
Yasmeen jee writes that many times there were talks on this issue at home.
Rafi Sahib ` s elder son Khalid tried to convince his father that it is legitimate for a singer to ask for royalty.
Rafi Sahib understood the thing but now it was too late.
Rafi Sahib was a person of very high esteem and an example of this is found in this book.
Actor Jeetendra had produced a film Deedar-e-yar(1982).
Because of some reason the production of the film floundered and released very late.
In the meanwhile other singers including Mohammad Rafi has increased their fees.
It is also known through the book that how fiend was Rafi Sahib about food.
Specially of sweets.
And yes he was also fond of stylish watches and cars.
Amongst colors he liked dark and shining colors which they often used on his cars.
On the other side his choice of outfits was extremely different.
He specially wore white or cream colored shirt.
There are also some samples of his sense of humor.
After the recording he found that Shammi kapoor was looking at him with perplexed eyes.
Similarly leaving the older house he shifted to a new building where actress Rekha also stayed.
Khalid was a big fan of Rekha, he once said that he will not go anywhere leaving this this house.
This is a very nice place.
Rafi Sahib became and said, ` great! Rekha really stays here? `
Teasing him on this Bilkis Begam told daughter in law Yasmin, did you see he is also no saint.
Anurag Basu ` s film Barfi might not have occupied a place among the category of foreign films in Oscars but it has got the most number of nominations in the 58th film fair award.
After that late Yash Chopra directed last film ` Jab tak hai jan ` is the second film to receive most number of nominations.
The love story of a deaf and dumb boy(Ranbeer kapoor) and an autistic girl(Priyanka chopra)has been nominated for a total of 9 categories.
Shahrukh khan and katreena acted ` Jab tak hai jaan ` has been nominated for 7 categories.
There is big competition between Barfi, English winglish, gangs of wasseypur, kahani and vicky donor for the best film.
A high level committee called a meeting on Wednesday for scrutinizing Padma awards.
There are intimations that Rajesh khanna the Bollywood superstar will be honored with Padma vibhushan country ` s second biggest honor.
Apart from this it is expected that Ramesh sippy, sholay ` s producer might be given the Padmashree award.
Both the Bollywood ` s big shots will be honored on the eve of republic day.
This year singer Bhupen Hazarika was honored with Padma vibhushan after death.
According to the sources the ministry of information and broadcasting had recommended for Rajesh khanna and Ramesh sippy.
All the films shown on television will now have to undergo a new procedure.
Roughly speaking the producers of such films willing to show their films on TV will now have to get a new certificate from the film censor board.
The new category of film certification will be called ` UAV ` (Universal adult video).
It should be noted that till now the censor board was providing certificate to the Indian films under four categories.
The categories are: ` U ` (Universal i.e able to be watched mostly), ` UA ` (Universal adult i.e the film can be watched by an minor on the consent of a guardian), ` A ` (Adult i.e which can be watched only by adults), and ` S ` (special category films such as films based on medicine, corporate or education).
According to the new proposal the producer of the films who want to telecast their film on TV will directly have to say this to the censor board and have to apply.
In the 20th international camel festival to be organized in the desert city the foreign tourists will get to see different colors of capital ` s culture on the cattle of Ladera.
The tourist department has given final shape to the cultural programs organized under the three day camel festival.
The tourists will get to see Gidda, bhangda, hariyani, and dogra dance of kashmir apart from Rajasthan on the cattle of Ladera on the first two days under camel festival beginning from 26th January.
Almost 150 artists from the entire state will showcase their art in the three day camel festival.
Priyanka Chopra was honored with critic choice for ` Saath khoon maaf ` in the 57th film fare awards.
Rekha, the actress who convinced people with her beauty and style was honored with the life time achievement award in the iifa award ceremony.
Parineeti chopra was awarded with the best actress in debut in the zee cine awards.
Dream girl Hema Malini was honored with the doctorate title by the Singhaniya University of Udaipur.
The popular actress Sharmila Tagore was honored with the title of honorary doctor of arts by the Napier university of Edinburgh.
The limca book of records has awarded singer Asha bhosle with ` people of the year ` .
She was given life time achievement award under screen awards.
Actress Rani mukherjee was honored with lions gold award.
Sonakshi sinha was honored with the Asia spa award.
The national sirpur festival will begin in sirpur from 4th January.
Chief minister Raman singh will inaugurate the three day national music and dance festival 2013.
Srilanka ` s high commissioner Prasad kariya wasam will also attend the ceremony.
Governor Shekhar dutt will wind it up on 6th January.
An event like this organized in Chattisgarh for the first time at national level.
The responsibility of the entire ceremony is in the hands of culture minister Brijmohan agrawal.
The major travel operators of many countries will participate in this.
Till now the travel operators of Japan, bhutan and Srilanka have given their consent.
A total of 500 artists including Padma vibhushan Channulal Mishra and Padmashree Prahlad Singh will give their presentation in the entire festival.
Ranbeer Kapoor and Priyanka chopra acted film ` Barfi ` is out of the Oscars.
It is the love story of a deaf and dumb girl and a girl suffering from autism.
Ranbeer has played the role of the boy and Priyanka has played the role of the girl.
Barfi was nominated from India this year for Oscars.
The viewers and critics had appreciated this film a lot on last 14th September.
From the 71 films from all across the world sent for the Oscars, only 9 could step forward for the next round of voting.
Bengali girl Bipasha Basu is the new brand ambassador of Salman khan ` s team.
Bipasha could never become a part of his camp because of the estrangement between Johm Abraham and Salman.
Since when John and Bipasha have separated the distance between her and Salman seem to disappear.
Sallu miya has made his brother sohail khan the brand ambassador of Mumbai team for the celebrity cricket tournament.
Several rumors are spreading for the sudden grace of Salman on Bipasha but Salman has played a significant role in the career of many actresses before this.
The play was staged in the kamani auditorium on occasion 100th birth anniversery of Vishnu prabhakar.
With the effort of Hindi academy in the present play the panorama of Gandhism, contemporary society, political and economic absurdities and freedom agitation have been shown with very influential way.
The theater presentation of Kaljayi composition was excessively liked by the viewers.
In the play based on the life and experiences of Sharat chandra his childhood days have been designed which was spent on scarcity and poverty.
He left his home during childhood for not having good relations with his father.
He struggled throughout his life.
The social absurdities and its influences is explicitly pictured in Sharad ` s compositions.
The artists completely entertained the viewers with their acting and dialogues.
Among the main artists Manish Shukla, Kundan kumar, Aryashree arya, Abhinav Bakshi and Chiya Joshi influenced.
` Bhakta Pooranmal ` was staged as the nautanki play by the Krishna art center in Meghdoot, Firozabad(Uttar Pradesh) on Friday.
The story ` Bhakta Pooranmal ` story is centered on the significance of patience in the lives of people.
The new queen, Pooranmal ` s step mother gets excessively attracted towards him and tries to allure him.
The storyline slowly reveals his tactics with incidents taking place one after another.
Recently Rajnikant completed 62 years of his life.
Nobody in the Indian film industry is parallel to the 12th December born Rajnikant.
Very few people know that Rajnikant had paid 26 crore rupees for the film Shivajee in 2007.
He became the second star in the entire Asia region to pay this much during that time.
Rajnikant ` s energy is worth praising.
Rajni who has reachers 62 has still not stopped.
His next film Kochdaiya is under shoot and Rajnikant is also involved in a full fledged way to complete this film.
Rajni ` s daughter Saundarya is directing the film and Deepika Padukone is the heroine of the film with 62 years Rajni.
Despite the third world cinema has now disappeared from the big screen but in the 5th Jaipur international film festival to be held on 30th January in Jaipur this time this cinema will rock.
Film ` s director Hanu Roj says that the third world cinema in India had begun during 50s.
Films like Pather Pancholi and do beegha zameen attracted the common masses towards it.
In India this cinema was identified as art movie.
Because of the aesthetic of these films they are given more preferences in the festival this time with a view to make the people acquainted with this.
Two Marathi and Malyalam films have reached the second phase of the most reputed Oscar awards.
Amongst the 282 films chosen from the total of 1376 films these two have been included in the best film category.
The name of the Marathi film is ` Hou de zara sa ushir and the name of the Malyalam film is ` color of sky ` .
Final round will be held in January.
This is the third Marathi film to reach the Oscars.
The directors of Usheer are Waseem and Tahir.
It is supposed to be equivalent to Hollywood ` s film ` Sky fall ` .
Vishwaroopam will be released in three languages Tamil, Telugu and Hindi.
On DTH the film released on 10th January while it was supposed to release on big screen a day after that.
Although Hasan has promised not to disappoint the DTH partners.
In the press conference called in a hurry on Wednesday Hasan said that I will decide the new release date of the film according to my convenience.
It should be noted that few Islamic organizations are demanding to see this before the formal release of the film.
Amir ` s car drowns in the ocean in one scene and Amir gets entrapped because of the shut doors.
During the shooting when the car drowned in the ocean its doors opened in the air itself.
The closed door was shown as closed in such a situation and the shot was done.
That is it! The door was shown shut with special effects and the shot was done.
The wonderful examples of such special effects will also be found later in Krish-3 and Dhoom-3.
Dharmendra ` s first film was ` Dil bhi tera ham bhi tere ` .
He got 50 rupees per day for that.
The second film was ` Shola aur shabnam ` whose amount was paid in installments therefore he did not have to face any difficulty to get it back.
Bimal Roy liked his work in ` shola aur shabnam ` and thus one day getting his call unexpectedly Dharmendra became happy.
He did not talk much after meeting, he just asked to show the reels of the films in which he had worked so far.
Dharmendra asked for some of the reels from the directors and went to show them to Bimal Roy.
Bimal da surveyed them but kept quiet and Dharmendra had to come back to his home.
Then the next day he got a call.
He did not talk much.
He just said, sit outside. I will call you when I am free.
Dharmendra kept waiting for him the entire day.
Dharmendra became disappointed and as he got up to leave Bimal da reached there.
He said I have chosen you for the role of hero.
He took the cheque of 1000 rupees and flew back home.
People said that one needs to have and account to en-cash that cheque.
He did not have that.
Then there was no looking back for Dharmendra after Bandini was made.
He bought a small fiat car.
He reached the studio.
He told Bimal da that I have also bought a car.
But Bimalda did not speak anything.
Dharmendra showed him his car.
Bimal da saw that with such excitement that he is looking at a car for the first time.
The biggest non controversial film of the year was Salman khan ` s ` Ek tha tiger which did a business of 198 crore rupees in Indian box office.
So far the record of making the highest earning went to ` Agnipath ` released on 26th January which earned 22 crore rupees.
Akshay Kumar ` s Rowdy Rathore was at number two which earned 138 crore rupees.
The last film of late Yash chopra as a director is ` Jab tak hai jaan ` which joined the 100 crore club with the business of 120 crore rupees.
In the club of 100 crores eight films got included in 2012 while there were only two in 2011.
In 2012 Amir khan came up with a single movie ` Talash ` but unexpectedly it did a little less business as compared to the last films.
The business of some low budget films was relatively tremendous.
Vidya Balan ` s ` Kahani ` with approximately 8-10 crore did a business of approximately 60 crores in the Box office.
But Sridevi ` s come back film ` English winglish ` was amazing which not only bagged the applause of the viewers in Toronto film festival but also won the heart of common people in India.
Paresh Rawal and Akshay Kumar ` s ` O my god ` and the new star cast of Karan Johar ` s ` Student of the year ` have put more than the cost incurred into the bag of the producers.
Akshay Kumar ` s ` Khiladi 786 ` released on 7th December is considered to be an average hit.
By the way the list of flop films in 2012 is also long.
In the 43rd International film festival of Goa held from 20th to 30th in the last November, ` Anhey Ghorey da dan ` a punjabi film got the best film award in the International competition section.
It gave heights to the Punjabi cinema.
The Indian government gave the permission to many overseas film makers to shoot their films in India when they asked for it.
It is special that most of these films have the scenes of Pakistan but because of the unwillingness of Pakistan these scenes were shot in India making the set of Pakistan here itself.
Many of its scenes are shot in Chandigarh instead of Pakistan.
The Hollywood companies are slowly strengthening their roots.
` Sky fall ` the newest film of the James bond series did a better business as compared to many Bollywood films released during that time.
` Sky fall did a total business of approximately 30 crore rupees while the other film ` Life of pi ` also pulled the viewers towards the theater.
Apart from Delhi ` s student Suraj sharma, there are Indian artists like Irfan khan and Tabu.
The Goa film festival began with the Oscar award winner film maker Ang Lee ` s film.
Many significant books have come this year in the field of criticism.
The discussion can be initiated from the father of the top critic in Hindi Dr. Namwar Singh ` s four published books which are the next series of the similar books published last year(edited by Ashish Tripathi).
There has never been the Publication of eight such books of any other vocal tradition.
` Criticism and ideology ` is the collection of his lectures in which his 22 lectures are kept in four sections whereby significant questions of those times have been considered.
In the ` Sahitya ki pahchaan ` volume there are mainly four centered lectures of his poem, eight lectures are also there on story and novel.
Along side his participation in various seminars have been given words.
Nandkishore nawal ` s ` Adhunik kavita ka itihass ` has been published which is centered on various poets from Bharatendu ,Kedarnath till Dhumal Singh ` s 9 generations have been divided in 9 chapters.
It would have been good if there was another tenth chapter on the poets of younger generation.
Dr. Pradeep Jain ` s book ` Prenchand ki shesh rachnaae ` is a significant book.
Which takes forward Prem chand ` s study.
Premchand ` s Six extinct stories, seven extinct essays, his speech delivered in Delhi literary conference and his letters written to various people make it a significant book.
Young critic Jeetendra Srivastava ` s book ` Indian social nationalism and Premchand ` is a new perspective on Premchand.
That has the analysis of his nationalism related views with regard to freedom revolution in non fiction and fiction.
` Ageya Sahchar ` edited by Vishwanath Prasad Tiwary is a good work throwing light on the various aspects of literature which has significant materials presented by the significant people.
` Bhuwaneshwar Samagra ` edited by Doodhnath singh is a significant publication which has the introduction about the complete personality of Bhuwaneshwar.
The 64 page introduction by the editor is readable from all the perspectives.
For the first time before the Hindi world the fact is published that Bhuwaneshwar was a poet. He not only wrote poems in Hindi but in English too which are presented here with their Hindi translations.
Diary/ reminiscence and biography all three disciplines make the past alive and the recalling about us and our own is done in the form of complete interest that is why others get interested about this.
The fourth section of ` Krishna baldev vaid ` s diary has come in the form of ` Jab aankh khul gai ` where he has looked back into his life during 1998-2001.
Poet Ajit kumar ` s ` Door van me nikat man ` opens unseen aspects of many creative writer ` s reminiscence and their personalities.
Through ` Alochak ka aakash ` Madhuresh has peeped into his life through the reminiscence.
In ` Apni dharti apne log ` Madhu kaankariya has written his experience of various cities in the form of reminiscence.
Narendra Mohan has researched very hard on Manto and his literature and presented his biography ` Manto Zinda hai ` which has become very readable.
In Hindi which is proud of its disciplines large number of ideological literature have been published.
such publications are ever increasing.
If the women consultation related literature is thought upon in the category then it will still be the favorite subject of the woman writers productive for the publishers.
Recently there is tendency of publishing the books consisting of the columns of various news papers by the country ` s popular journalist and columnists.
From this point of view three significant books have come up this year.
The volume entitled ` MiTta Bharat Banta India ` is the collection of two such scripts by the editor journalist shashi shekhar which has the columns of his last one decade which throws light on his perspective on all the issues of the country and abroad.
` Kuch dikhe aur bhi ` is the book of popular poet and thinker Kailash Bajpai. It is the readable collection of such scripts.
While Anna Hazare and his stuggle and the earlier supporter of Anna team, Arvind Kejriwal is in spotlight.
` The struggle: Scope and questions ` is a collection of essays of various personalities on the movement of Anna edited by Arunoday Prakashan has come up which contains the essays of Arvind Kejriwal, Manish Sisaudiya etc.
Arvind Kejriwal ` s book ` Swaraj ` clarifies his self governance related notion where he has talked about the influential model for bringing the real Swaraj in the country and the msystem change and our struggle manifesto against corruption.
People are finding it very interesting to know the culture and tradition of the country through paintings.
People saw the culture of the country through the beautiful pictures decorated with various colors in the exhibition of more than 40 paintings.
Apart from this they are getting spiritual information from the various forms of Lord Krishna.
The artists have drawn the Universe on canvas and thus shown the 9 planets.
The exhibition shall continue till 21st January.
The composition Julius Caesar of the popular dramatist William Shakespeare has remained quite popular amongst the people interested in literature and theater.
People find the story of the conspiracy against the 44 BC emperor of Rome and his death quite interesting.
May be that is why viewers totally liked the play ` The tragedy of Julius Caesar directed by Bhagirathi in the 15th Indian theater festival organized in Delhi.
The play was staged in the Sriram center on Saturday.
While the viewers took total joy of the play shivratri based on the social discrimination.
It is the story of the struggle of the character ` Mugda Sangaiyya ` for combating caste system and not revealing their personal identity at job place.
In the play it has been shown that everybody has equal right while praying for god.
Today at the last day of the festival top notch plays will be staged.
The top tennis player of India Leander Pace is has become ready to rock on film screen.
Pace ` s film is going to release on 4th January which is a thriller film.
Along with Pace, Jimmy shergil, Priyanshu Chaterjee, Gulshan grover, Priyanshu Pandey, Pooja bose and Sayali bhagat are working for the film.
Speculations are being made that Pace is in the role of a terrorist in the film.
Again a woman won the 6th season of Big boss.
Urvashi Dholakiya won the award for the 6th season.
In the Lonawana situated Big boss-6 set , the host of the show Salman khan announced about her victory.
Imam siddiki gave a strong competition to Urvashi.
The difference in their votes was very less.
Sana khan was the second runner up.
Urvashi got 50 lakh rupees as the prize amount.
That is why the victory can be said to be special for him because she is a single parent.
Imam Siddiki said that I wanted to win the show because I needed the winning amount.
He wanted to open a hospital in his village.
Om Puri who made a place in viewer ` s heart through his powerful acting is again turning towards theater.
After around 25 years the viewers will get a chance to see the magic of his acting through the theater.
Under the four day Punjabi theater festival the play ` Teri amrita ` the theater viewers will be face to face with the influential acting of Divya Dutta with him.
This play will be based on the love expressed through exchanged letters till 35 years.
This play is the Indian version of ` Love letters ` by A. R Gurni which was nominated for the Pulitzer awards.
It is not a mere action film.
It has the delight of a married life, the mutual gimmickry of the characters and the jauntiness of Kanpur.
At the roof of the house during midnight the protagonist asks his father that when and how did he met his mother?
The sons acts as if asleep in spite of hearing.
All the scenes of the father and son are radical and interesting and it has the same feel which is between him and his father Salim in reality.
The film entrenched with married life has the touch of familial but the director Arbaaz khan has not forgotten that the viewers demand all the 9 kinds of saps from him therefore it has action as well as Salman ` s typical touch of humor.
It is also a satire on the governmental system where one gets the salary but does nothing.
Arbaz khan is not inclined in making social outrageous films as Prakash jha does but he has presented some subtle signals.
A new face of romance has come up in the film entrenched with the love of marriage.
Arbaz has restricted this love affair away from the society within the decorum of the family.
Salman has his own values in life.
He does not like kisses on screen and a little kiss on cheek produce titillation in his whole body.
The conclusion is that like comic characters Chulbul Pandey creates serene bliss.
Actually it is the 100th year of Indian cinema and it still has childishness, the viewers still have craze for stars and the economy of the industry is still abnormal.
Arbaz khan ` s film has everything like childhood, craziness and abnormality and the film can cross the figures of two hundred crores.
Undoubtedly today neither Raja Ramsingh is there who encouraged the Ganga-jamunu tradition through kites nor those times but the residents of the city has still maintained his hobby of kite flying.
In the same series three day kite festival has been organized in the city palace by the royal family.
In the ceremony to be held from 12th to 14th January Indian and overseas tourists will participate.
Some samples of old kites and threads are still safe in the city palace museum which are put on exhibition every year in this festival.
Maharaja Ram singh used to fly high kites which were called Tukkal.
During the times of Ram singh the kite makers and thread weavers were called from Lucknow.
Ram singh had build a special room for the indigenous and overseas kites.
It is the boom of Christmas.
In the west the celebrities have forgotten everything and are busy in making Christmas and the new year a memorable one.
The discussed celebrities like Pamela Anderson is also all set to give a memorable evening.
Now she will be seen ice skating with her partner Matt evers in her TV show ` dancing on ice ` .
While Lauren has hurt herself while rehearsing for the show.
But her morale is strong.
Apart from Olympic boxer Campbell ex gymnast player Beth Tweddle will also be seen tapping his feet on the dance floor of this show.
There are other celebrities also in the field apart from them.
On the other side there is Sheila Hancock.
She is 79 years old.
Despite that she is tapping her feet on the dance floor.
One such participant is 45 years old racer Kaoline Jackson of Olympic relay race.
Undoubtedly the whole world will dance when these stars will dance.
I started my film career with the film ` Kissa kursi ka ` in 1978.
I was doing theater in the national school of drama in Delhi when the director Amrit Nahta came up with the proposal of this film.
The experience in working for films was completely different from theater.
Govind Nihlani gave me the first break in television with ` Tamas ` .
` Tamas ` was actually shot like a film which was divided in some episodes and telecast on television.
In the meanwhile I also did a serial of Mrinal Sen.
I got the national film award for ` Tamas ` .
My first serial on TV was ` war war parivar ` .
Amongst whatever roles I have played so far, the role of the Rajasthani woman in Prakash jha ` s film ` Pareeniti ` is my favorite.
As of now I am enjoying the role of ` Dadi sa ` in ` Balika Vadhu ` .
Sonam kapoor has said that her favorite actor is Farhaan Akhtar.
Actually it is a new trend these days.
Declare the person you are working with to be your favorite.
Sonam amd Farhaan will be seen together in their upcoming film ` Bhag Milkha Bhag ` next year.
Actually they should keep praising everybody so that their roles are not cut.
There is nothing bad in that.
Since khan is supposed to be the synonym of success in Hindi films therefore because of the outstanding success of Vidya Balan she has been honored with the title of ` Lady khan ` .
Then Vidya Balan had jestingly said a truth that the success of others should be measured with Vidya Balan.
First ` Dirty Picture ` and then with ` Kahaani ` she has belied the supposedly truth that Hindi films are successful only because of the Hero and Heroines are just there to sing and dance.
Vidya Balan has no abstinence from singing and dancing.
She has the grace of common Indian woman along with acting.
With her vigorous success she has given the writers and directors the possibilities to extend their imagination.
They can now create the actresses of their wish on screen.
There is always a turmoil in the world of fashion.
Like every year this year also the fashion designers and Bollywood were shadowed with this.
The concept of ` retro modernism ` will step down from films onto the street fashion by experimenting with retro look.
That is the fashion that that gave the look of 70s also had a touch of modern style.
The credit for making it most popular goes to the debutant Huma Queireshi with her film Gangs of Wasseypur .
By the club song of Talaash Kareena brought dark red lipstick into fashion.
While Aliya Bhatt popularized dark pink colored lipstick by the film student of the year.
Designer Sabyasachi ` s sarees are stuck in Bollywood.
Manish Malhotra put kashmiri and chicken work before people.
This year is for ready to wear clothes and designers have also included this in their collection.
Many Bollywood heroines have been seen in pre-stitched sarees during award functions.
Hasan is adamant that he will release this film on DTH(direct to home) a day before releasing it in cinema halls.
The organization of single screen and multiplexes of the entire country is angry at this decision and has takes this issue to the representative organizations of the film industry.
Before this no big or small film has been released together in cinema hall and DTH.
There is a custom of releasing new films on DTH at least after a month.
According to rumors Kamal Hasan will earn 50 crore rupees with this.
While the distributors of ` Vishwaroopam ` made in Hindi, Tamil and Telugu believe that there will bad impact on the business of the film in cinema halls because many people will see it at their homes on DTH through video on demand.
But the producer-director of the film has issued a statement that those who wish to see the film on big screen will likewise come to the cinema halls but the intention of releasing it on DTH is to reduce the loss due to piracy and to make more profit by new ways of revenue.
With this the decision of Kamal hasan in north India is being opposed.
In the spy thriller with Kamal hasan as the lead actor, there are actors like Pooja kumar, rahul bose and Shankar ehsan loy has given the music.
` Barfi ` won the battle in the 58th film awards with shining light, music and colorful presentations.
Including the best film award he bagged a total of 7 awards.
Ranbeer Kapoor got the best actor award for this film.
While Vidya Balan got the award for the best actress for the film ` Kahaani ` .
In the program completed on Sunday late director Yash Chopra was given the lifetime achievement award.
` Kahani ` s director Sujoy Ghosh was honored with the award of the best director.
The politics in Maheshwar has The politics in Maheshwar district has started heating up because of the shooting of Yamla pagla deewana-2.
The congress people handed over the memorandum to the joint collector K. C. Rewal and demanded to stop the shooting immediately.
Congress says that at the name of shooting vulgarity is being spread in the holy city.
The shooting should be stopped immediately.
Film producer Sunil Saini says that Yamla Pagla deewana was a family film.
People watched the film with their family.
We do not make vulgar films.
There is a deep relationship of turbans with the states, castes, tribes and the customs and rituals of the religions of the country.
Every turban has had an exceptional tradition.
This tradition of turbans has been presented in the exhibition organized during the 15th Indian theater festival of NSD.
The director of the exhibition Dinesh yadav said that many meanings are associated with turbans in our society. They include caste, religion, region, and patriarchy.
When people look towards them they think about them and questions also arise in their minds.
Many curious people also asked that why don ` t we see the women wearing turbans.
In the audio guide, background about every turban, the occupation of the person who wore it and the ways of wearing it was told.
It was also shown during the exhibition that what are the symbols of the turbans worn by the bride and groom sides during the weddings.
Indian theater festival known as the biggest theater festival of Asia ended on Sunday.
The festival was inaugurated by the popular director Shyam Benegal and closed by staging Abhijeet Sengupta directed play ` Afsaana ` .
What is the reason that the city that has been attracting the foreign tourists because of its forts, elephants, horses and royal wealth is now seen as the Mecca of literature on the international map.
Actually at the bottom there are books and book lovers.
At present India is one of the top notch markets for English books in the world.
Apart from this around 25 percent of the sale of English books is received through the tourists.
Undoubtedly quite a good amount of money is being spend on English books but there is also a section of the readers which equally reads English and Hindi.
Anant spends around 1000 rupees every week on English and Hindi books.
He says that, the demand for fiction is always there in the market.
268 authors from all across the world will come for the literature festival(JLF)this time.
Here 7 authors are from Pakistan.
The festival will run in Diggy place till 28th January.
Amongst them Jamil ahmad and Mohammad Haneef have been nominated for the DSC south asian literature prize.
This award will be given during the festival on 25th January.
In the Mahakumbh of literature the authors of Britain, America and South Africa will also participate.
Pakistani author Sharmeen Ubaid ` s name was there in the list of 100 influential people of the world in the times magazine 2012.
He is an Oscar award winning Pakistani Canadian journalist.
Actor and director Pankaj kapoor has said that people have lack of time to pay heed at serious issues.
So with entertainment people ` s attention can be attracted towards this by putting serious issues before them.
Pankaj had come to attend a program in Gudgaav.
Pankaj kapoor whose favorite actor and ideal is Rajesh khanna says that there is lack of good script writers in the film city.
He said that the new generation today has many means of entertainment.
There is a storehouse of information.
In such a situation everyone has remote control in their hands on which the fast tapping fingers decide about the likes and dislikes.
A good script writer can keep the people together on serious issues along with innovation.
Pankaj kapoor says that the government should organize workshops for such writings.
The new generation should also give equal right and respect to women.
Pankaj said that he always tried to keep himself honest for his character.
In the film fare awards which is said to be the Oscars of Bollywood there was charm of ` Vicky Donor ` and ` Barfi ` .
The biggest award of Bollywood for 2012 were distributed on Sunday night in a colorful ceremony in Yash raj film studio.
On the occasion of the completion of 100 years of Indian cinema the winners were this time awarded the trophy with a golden base.
Shahrukh khan and Saif Ali khan titillated the viewers with their anchoring.
Amongst the successful programs of the small screen the sixth version of ` Kaun banega crorepati(KBC) has reached its last post.
Amitabh Bachchan Bollywood ` s great hero and the host of this show is very upset with this.
The last episode will be telecast on the upcoming 26th January.
70 years old Big B has hosted 5 out of the 6 versions of the show.
The third version of the program was hosted by king Shahrukh khan.
I respectfully thank you all viewers.
I am hopeful that we will meet very soon.
Buddhist shepherd Dalai Lama will also participate in the literary festival being organized in Jaipur from 24th-28th January.
The organizers of the organizing committee have issued a statement of Dalai Lama where he says that, ` there has been a big role of literature in my life since childhood ` .
By participating in this program I want to meet people associated with literature.
Pakistani writers Muhammad Haneef, Jameel Ahmad, Fahmeeda Riyaz and Pakistani-canadian novelist M.A Faruqui etc have to participate in this ceremony.
Salman Rushdie is coming to India on 23rd January for promoting Deepa Mehta ` s film based on his novel ` midnight children ` which share the same name.
Islamic organizations are protesting against his participation for the literary festival.
The third ` young musician and dancers ceremony ` is being organized in the capital in the Sri ram center.
The young artists of various lines will present their art in different styles in the program organized by the council of literature and art.
Apart from this the duet of Indian singing and violin play shall also delight the viewers.
Lohri is made by combing the words sesame and milk sweet .
Which later changed with time and was known as Tilhori and then Lohri.
Although in many parts of Punjab this festival is also known as Lohi or Loi.
Lohri is associated with the Dulha-bhatti folklore who was a brave warrior during Mughal times.
The city is totally ready to dole out happiness on the festival.
While the major market is smelling from the aroma of sweets and peanuts in the exaltation of Lohri, the newly married couples are excited to sweeten their relationships.
The director Mohit suri who is dating Udita goswamy for the last seven years has now now decide to marry her.
He had first met Udita on the sets of Zeher in 2005.
Mohit had started his career as a director from this film.
We were planning for marriage for a long time and we think this is the right time.
He will also be seen with the actress Sonakshi sinha in the days to come.
He had worked before with her father the Bihari Babu Shatrughn Sinha.
The next film of Saif ` s production will start very soon.
There is a plan to take her sister ` s boyfriend Kunal Khemu as the lead actor.
Saif Ali ` s next film Race 2 is also the sequel of Race.
Here John Abrahim and Anil kapoor are there with him.
The five day Jaipur literary festival will begin today on Thursday.
More than 500 authors, writers from the world will participate in the biggest literary mahakumbh of Asia.
Discussions on various topics in five different tents will be held at the organizing place Diggy place.
The Jaipur Police commissioner B.L. Soni held a meeting with the officers on Wednesday regarding the security of the authors in the literary festival.
Like the last year this year also there are likelihood of controversies regarding the literary festival.
It should be noted that last year writer Jeet Thayil, Rucheer Joshi, Hari Kunjru and Amitaav kumar read few sections of Rushdie ` s ` Satanic works ` .
It was alleged with hurting the sentiments of the Islamic organizations.
Aslam Khan,the chairman of Jaipur ` s muslim forum has announced to protest against the Jaipur visit of controversial writers.
On the other side some Hindu organizations have threatened to protest against the inclusion of Pakistani writers.
The Indian public youth front is protesting against the Pakistani literary figures coming for the Jaipur literary festival.
In the Indira Gandhi national open university a boom of folk dances was seen.
The event was cultural program organized by IGNOU ` s literary and cultural forum.
Here folk songs and dances of different states introducing the patriotism and unity in plurality were presented.
The program was inaugurated by the chancellor Professor Gopinath Pradhan by lighting lamps.
Many people including the director of songs and theater department M. Rajamanaar, Prof. Awadesh kumar singh the chairman of Ignou literary and cultural forum, joint secretary of the forum Dr Rashmi sinha were present on the occasion.
By the initiative of student organization AISA, ` Kaun hai ye gustaakh ` play was staged for the first time in the Akshay theater located at Baba Khadag singh marg.
after the intervention of the ministry NSD cancelled the two shows of the Pakistan theater group.
At 6 o ` clock on Saturday the group staged ` Kaun hai ye gustaakh ` .
The script of the play is given by Shahid Nadeem while the director of the film Madeeha Gauhar said that she has been doing plays for the past 25 years in different parts of India.
Salman khan himself is not less than a brand.
Salman khan who has given super hit films one after another has made one more record.
There is a rumor that Salman has signed a deal of 500 crores with a entertainment channel.
According to the new agreement Salman ` s all films in the next five years will be telecast on this channel.
Salman has cancelled his program of going to America for treatment.
In the first edition of the world book fair which will be organized every year from this year special priority will be given to Indian tribal literature and the literature related to vernacular languages and culture.
The theme of the world book fair organized by the national book trust in Pragati maidan will be ` Swadeshi Awaaz: Bhartiya lok va Janjatiya Sahitya ` within which there will be activities related to the culture, literature and art depicting these extinct dialects.
An effort will be made to acquaint the new generation about its prosperity through them.
M. A. Sikandar the director of national book trust who was the chief organizer of the book fair told that India had been a country of diverse cultures.
Many languages and dialects have lost their identity here.
Here everyday there will be discussions, screening of films and live performances of Indian artists.
With this the new young readers will get to know about these cultures closely.
I belong to Delhi.
There I was doing theater for 11 to 12 years.
I came to Mumbai after completing my college studies.
Here I was doing a play with Barry john who is my mentor.
Looking at my my work in the play somebody suggested my name to Dibakar Banerjee who was then making ` Oye lucky lucky oye ` .
I was in a second lead in the film.
Then I had no understanding about the techniques of shooting and camera etc.
In my very first film Abhay Deol was there with him who had worked in many films by then.
I was a little scared because he was Dharmendra jee ` s nephew.
My first shot was in Delhi.
It was shot in a running train near ring road.
There were adequate arrangements for security.
Though oye lucky lucky is my first film but I like my role in Gangs of wasseypur is my favorite.
These days I am shooting for Prerna Vadhawan ` s ` Iskeriya ` and Sanjay Leela Bhansali ` s ` Ramleela ` .
Once again Anil Sharma has stepped into the field of direction.
His next film is ` Singh Sahib the great ` .
Sunny Deol is the lead actor in the film.
He has been handed over the role of such a collector who fight against the system despite being a part of it.
The film has a satire on the current situation of the country and a sweet love story also.
Anil sharma tells in detail, ` The story of my film has come out of the current social conditions of the country.
At the center of the story is the anarchy that is prevalent today.
This film will have its own kind of revolution.
Yes, it will be an entertainment film totally.
It shall have healthy entertainment.
Its entire shooting is supposed to be in India but it will be filmed with a grandeur.
Everybody knows that Sunny Deol is the favorite actor of Anil sharma.
He is very comfortable with Sunny.
It is the same situation with Sunny.
Working under Anil ` s direction is like being tension free.
Actually the ideological level of both of them is also quite similar.
Dharam jee has always been my favorite hero.
Any ways, I have my great films with Sunny also.
The biggest film of my direction career Gadar ek prem katha is with him only.
As of now the shooting of this new film of Anil has begun in Bhopal.
Actress Amrita Rao and Prakash Raj have also been handed significant characters.
60 percent of the film is supposed to be shot in Bhopal.
The entire film has been planned to be shot in 85 days.
After finishing this film definitely a big budget film shall be made.
There is a old tradition of singers acting in Bollywood.
Now singer Babul Supriyo is trying himself in acting.
Very few people know that Babul has worked for few Bangla movies earlier.
But he had not worked for Hindi films yet.
Babul has signed his first Hindi film.
The position of saint Kabir born 600 years ago still have the power to attract the present day singers.
Talking about the screen of Kabir das Jee Abhaas says that he possess a hidden musical skill.
These screens can be molded in any tune and rhythm and sung.
And there is a scope of availing tickets also by the viewers who reach during the last week.
Abhaas also says that his generation likes the screens of Kabir as much as the previous generation does.
Director Neeraj Pandey who gave a fabulous film like ` A Wednesday ` has once again come up with ` Special 26.
The film is based on a true story of a jewelry shop robbed by 26 people who disguise by appearing as income tax officers.
Akhshay kumar plays the lead role in the film.
Neeraj Pandey is working for a second film after 4 years.
` The Indian theater festival ` known as the Mahakumbh of theater in Asia was crowded with many viewers on the very first day itself.
Despite the chilly weather viewers were seen in large numbers turning towards the theater festival started in Mandi House.
On Sunday morning on the ticket window of the theater show a houseful board was seen in front of many productions.
Although this year the ticket arrangement of the entire festival has been divided into three categories so that all the tickets are not sold in the initial days.
The three plays out of the five plays being staged on the second day of the Indian theater festival were houseful in the beginning only.
Not only this, the tickets of 9 plays were announced to be sold out till Sunday evening.
Curtains were pulled up on Friday from the Delhi International film festival organized in the capital.
The mayor of the southern Delhi Municipal corporation Savita sharma inaugurated the film festival in the program organized in the Sirifort auditorium.
Zohra has herself crossed 100 years of age.
After this the film ` 80 million ` was shown.
A dance by Anamika Singh is also presented in the film.
People remained present in large numbers on the occasion.
16 films of the neighbor country Pakistan has been included here.
He said that the viewers will get to see the completion of 100 years of Indian cinema during the film festival.
The film festival starting from 21-27 December in Delhi shall be done in the NDMC auditorium of Connaught place.
32 countries consisting of Pakistan, France, Brazil, Israel, America have been included in six categories.
Actress Shabana Azmi and film director Meera Nair were awarded Padma Bhushan this year.
Shabana was honored by the New york administration seeing her contribution to the Cinema.
It is the first time that an Indian artist is given this honor.
She was given the certificate of special congressional recognition.
The senior artist of Kannada theater Nagarthanamma was honored with the Padmashri award.
Gunjan Sharma of ` The week ` was honored for her remarkable contribution in the field of journalism.
Shailaja Bhatt of Karnataka was honored by the Nirmal grass award.
Punjabi singer Gurmeet Bawa was honored by the music and theater academy award.
Mamta Banerjee honored Firoza Begum of Bangladesh in Kolkata for her remarkable contribution in the field of music.
Actress Vidya Balan got the National film award for the best actress for the film ` Dirty Picture ` .
Not only this, the rural development ministry has made Vidya, the brand ambassador of sanitation in India.
She got married to Siddharth Roy Kapoor at the end of the year.
Aditi Mukherjee has become the first Indian to receive the Norman Borlaug Award.
She has been awarded this prize for the field research by world food prize foundation.
Actress Madhuri Dixit was awarded the ` Dinanath Mangeshkar award ` .
Madhuri was also awarded with the ` Rajkapoor Honor ` award this year.
Madhuri was honored by installing her wax statue in madam Tussaud museum.
The popular poetess of Maharashtra Dr. Nandini Mehta was honored with Nirmala Deshpande Award.
The actress Sonam Kapoor was honored with the Femina woman award in a ceremony organized in Mumbai.
Rafi Sahib was very a particular man about principles and promises.
He never used to stick others work because of him.
Once musician Laxmikant Pyarelal got to know just a day before that Rafi Sahib is going out of India for a program.
The next day he recorded 5-6 songs from 10 in the morning till 11 at night.
Abba was very tired and exhausted that day.
There was rift between the music director Shankar jee and Lata Mangeshkar on some issue.
Lata Jee had stopped working with him.
Rafi Sahib convinced Lata Jee and brought them together.
When Rafi Sahib had begun his career, he used to get 50-75 rupees for his singing.
But when he sang for his friend Kishore Kumar ` s film Shabash Daddy , he took only one rupee as a token of love.
During the initial phase of 1960 there came a time when Lata Mangeshkar got angry with Rafi Sahib and had stopped singing with him.
Both of them had not worked together for about 2-3 years.
Then the music director late Jaykishan brought them together.
The reason behind the clash was the royalty of songs.
Singer provides life to a song.
Many times there were talks on our houses on the issue of royalty.
I very well remember the time when Raj Kapoor had produced his second film Barsat.
Similarly one day unexpectedly I got Raj Kapoor ` s telephone.
He had said that, ` My film is breaking the windows of the box office, well I have nothing to do with this.
I only want to know this, that was is the opinion of the Art and literature world people towards that.
If you could arrange that then I am ready to come to Lucknow immediately.
During those days the information director of the Uttar Pradesh was BhagwatiSharan Singh and his office then was at the Royal hotel.
With infinite happiness Bhagwatibhai gave the invitation to accomplish the program in his committee room.
Raj Kapoor reached Lucknow in time and expressed his appreciation towards the top notch personalities for getting involved in the ` Barsat ` controversy.
The film makers today think that they can win the whole world merely by showing their face.
The film makers before him were not interested in showing their faces.
He believed that a beautiful heart is more significant than a beautiful face.
Actor Om Puri shall be seen acting amidst the theater lovers of Delhi after 25 years.
The actor Om Puri is also very excited with this decision.
Along with his comeback in theaters he is also waiting to reach amongst his viewers.
The play will be staged on 19th to 22nd December evening in the Sri Ram center.
He told that he had been working for the Punjabi theaters during his childhood days.
The directors of the Punjab Art Theater recognized him during a college play.
He aligned with the Harpal Tiwana Group of Punjab and graduated from NSD.
They reached Mumbai from here and kept acting for film institutes and films.
Om Puri and Divya Dutta will be before the audiences in the lead roles.
