In the year 1967 our scientists began a huge program to bring an increase in the production of cotton as a result of which more than twice increase took place in both per hectare produce and gross produce in a few years only .
Area of cotton farming is maximum in India -LRB- around 80 lakh hectare -RRB- and this is the only country where all four types of cotton worth farming are farmed .
But in production india ` s place is fourth after America , Russia and China which are maximum producing countries .
The major reason behind the low production of cotton in India is that proper irrigation facility is available only in 1 of the agricultural land and the rest of the farming depends upon rain water .
According to production per acre in states Maharashtra is a leader but in gross produce Gujarat is topmost .
In cotton farming more than 4.5 crore people are busy in employment and run their household through this only .
It is difficult to describe the beauty of cotton farms in words - it felt like as if heaven itself spread whiteness on this earth .
The smile and shine of thousands of fiber coming out of the seeds of core was enamouring and it appeared as if they were decorative sculptures with magical attraction on 4 to 6 foot high plants .
Dr. Joshi told students that cotton is a seed fiber which grows from plant of Gossypium plant .
It is a member of Malvaceae family which is also known as mallow family in layman ` s language .
36 varieties are approved under Gossypium species but to produce cotton of a good variety from these farming of only four kinds of cotton is done because other species are wild .
Gossypium Hirsutum is the most important plant species of these which is originally found in Cambodia and Mexico but now it is being grown in a large part of America .
It is important for many qualities to be there in cotton crop .
Of these some properties are as follows : Early maturation of crop , enough availability of immunity to defend from diseases and insects and pests , of reaping more harvest , fibers being more strong etc .
New varieties of cotton are being issued which contain above mentioned qualities .
For the production of cotton in every cotton species various varieties of cotton have been developed through the medium of breeding program .
The chromosomes of two species can be interbred to develop hybrid plants .
Recently few years back a new seed of cotton has been prepared in America through genetic modification which is known as Bt cotton seed .
This seed provides the cotton crop with the power to fight from diseases and insects .
With its use there has been tremendous increase in the cotton production of America and China .
The permission to sow this seed in India has been recently granted .
Warm climate , adequate humidity and loamy soil along with proper irrigation facility are required for best cotton production .
Cotton is sown at different times depending upon the climatic condition of the region , types of soil and the cotton species and varieties .
Cotton is generally grown in the mid of May in north India .
After sowing when the seeds grow and the main root enters the soil then it starts taking its food from the soil for its growth .
Right from the growth of cotton plant to its flowering stage there is great impact of sunlight , warm climate and availability of water .
For example if there is high temperature both during day and night then the flowering stage begins lately .
Within four to six weeks it starts budding and after 100 days of sowing the plant starts flowering white or light  dark yellow colored very sensitive flowers .
The seed capsules grow very fast and after ripening it becomes 2.5 cm in width and 3.8 cm in length .
The seed capsule ruptures after 50-80 days and during this time of the year -LRB- November -RRB- when it completely opens we get to see this sight .
The tents of cotton fibers are generally plucked in the month of November with hands in India and with the help of machine in abroad .
The teacher said that silk worm rearing in India started in the year 400 .
Now India leads the silk producing countries of the world .
It is a small industry where 50,000 villages are engaged in the work of sericulture .
India is the only country where various kinds of silk are procured by rearing many kinds of silk worms .
Golden colored Munga silk is grown only in our county .
Like agriculture , silkworm rearing is also a major means of earning livelihood where many thousands of laborers produce valuable fibers while working .
Silk is prepared by many kinds of worms but Bombyx Mori is the the major silkworm among them and silk is produced in the special environment of sericulture farm .
The larva of this worm eat mulberry leaves .
Silkworm looks like butterfly from whose eggs initially caterpillar is built .
Then the caterpillar pupa builds a cyst across itself for its safety in the process of chrysalis which is known as cocoon .
The chrysalis comes out of the cocoon in the form of moth after complete maturation and then the female moth lays eggs .
Thus the life cycle of silkworm completes .
They said that they rear silkworms of Bombyx Mori species only .
The female moth of these insects give approximately 700 eggs after coming out of the cocoon and then die .
While silkworms of other species give 350-400 eggs .
The size of every egg is equal to the size of a pin head which has a soft point .
Because of this soft point the cocoon breaks easily .
These eggs are very light .
The weight of around 40,000 eggs is just approximately an ounce .
According to the climate these eggs turn into larva within 3-7 days .
A new caterpillar is just 1 inches tall but it is so glutton that it grows very fast after eating mulberry leaves .
A caterpillar eats 7,000-9 ,000 times mulberry leaves of its weight .
While growing a caterpillar frequently changes its skin so that it covers its increasing size .
Thus after eating mulberry leaves continuously for 30-35 days it becomes a gray colored caterpillar and its length and width becomes 3 `` and 1 `` respectively .
Further this caterpillar becomes a light pink colored transparent worm after which it starts losing interest in eating .
Every worm has two glands which are located in the head portion of the worm below its jaw .
The silkworm compresses both its gland and continuously makes two fibers of silk .
If we see this thin fiber through microscope then we will know that this fiber is made of two fibers .
These thin fibers are called brin .
These two thin silk brins come out coherently with serene in the spinning head which is known as bave .
These silk fibers are triangular which have organized molecular chains in the form of micro and macro fibrils .
A single silkworm makes silk with the speed of 46 m .
It will be more appropriate to say that while making a complete fibril it writes the digit 8 for about 12 lakh number of times .
While making fibers the worm loses its weight and the caterpillar chrysalis turns into pupa inside the cocoon and becomes a moth in two weeks .
Now in this condition silkworm takes out the alkaline element and makes pores by dissolving some part of cocoon with its help and the worm come out of the cocoon through this pore .
But in sericulture farm we do not let the chrysalis come out .
The silk worm is kept in light steam and killed inside the cocoon before it comes out .
This process is known as stoving .
In the stoving process silkworm is killed inside the cocoon but the silk fiber or cocoon doesn ` t get harmed because of the steam .
The color and shape of cocoon depends upon the diet and climate of the silkworm .
The cocoon obtained from silkworm in china are mostly white in color because the caterpillar there eats white mulberry leaves .
In Japan and Europe the cocoon are cream and light yellow colored because there the caterpillar there eats castor oil plants and absorbs an element named tannin inside it .
In Japan light green colored cocoon are also grown whose caterpillars eat green leaves .
Apart from white cocoon , gray and light brown colored cocoon are found in India .
In order to differentiate between the luster and softness of fibers it is essential to know that every fiber is made of two thin brins and these brins are joined with saricin glue .
Thus we can say that every fiber is primarily made of two chemical elements . The first element is fibrin , in the form of liquid which comes out of spinrat and get dried after coming in contact with air and the other is saricin glue .
Every thread contains approximately 75 % fibrin and 25 % saricin .
Four kinds of silk are produced in our country , mulberry silk , tasar , aeri and moonga .
India is the only country where golden yellow colored munga silk is produced .
Mulberry silkworms are reared at many places in India such as hilly regions of Assam , Bengal , Konnur , Tamilnadu , Dehradun and Himachal Pradesh .
UniVoltine and Bivoltine silkworm in Kashmir , good quality Multivoltine silkworm in Bengal and Karnataka .
Our country produces approximately 90 % mulberry silk and the rest of the 10 % is wild silk tasar , aeri and moonga .
Since when silk board has been established in India , there has been significant progress in scientific methods of silk production .
The silk worms from which tasar silk is obtained are produced in warm and temperate climatic regions of the country .
The cocoons are mostly oval , tough and brown colored .
The tasar silk caterpillar eats oak tree leaves at the place of mulberry leaves , possibly the brown color of its cocoon is because of tannin absorption of leaves .
One doesn ` t needs to kill the tasar silkworm inside cocoon and long fibers are easily available .
But the tasar fibers are thick and tough as compared to mulberry silk fibers and the amount of saricin found in them is also more than moonga and aeri silk .
The golden colored silk is obtained from Multivoltine class of silkworms .
This silkworm is particularly found in Assam .
The cocoon of this silkworm is closed and the shell is very thin .
The weight of a single cocoon is approximately 6.3 grams where the thin layer weighs just 0.5 grams .
It is a white or red colored silk which is obtained from silkworms of multivoltine class .
Such worms are reared in Assam , Bihar , Bengal , Manipur , Orissa and Tripura .
The cocoons of such worms are somewhat long .
The weight of a cocoon is just 3 grams .
The specialty of such cocoons is that they change colors .
Because of the open mouth of the Aeri silk they can not be reeled .
The process of extracting fibers from cocoon is called reeling .
This process requires sound knowledge of reeler and a good reeling machine so that adequate amount of silk is extracted from the cocoon .
Since the fiber extracted from a single cocoon is very thin and which is difficult to reel therefore the fibers of 3-10 cocoons are together reeled .
For example in order to make a multifilament yarn of 20-22 danier 7 cocoons are sufficient .
The adverse effect of globalization and world trade organizations on the farmers of developing countries has been a subject of concern in recent years , the reasons of concern regarding particularly the cotton producing farmers are very clear .
20,000 American farmers were helped with 470 crore dollars in the year 2005 , it is equal to the market price of this crop .
Because of this reason the prices of cotton in world market has fallen down to 9-13 % , despite this about 1 of world ` s cotton export is received by America .
There has been complaints regarding the adverse effect globalization especially by the Vidarbha farmers and also at other places in India .
A leading farmer worker of Vidarbha , Vijay Jawanghiya recently said that during 1997 and 2003 110 lakh bell cotton has been imported .
The import tax has been reduced to 10 % .
The garment mills that export cotton do not need to pay even this .
That is why subsidy based cheap foreign prices are directly harming our farmers .
According to the available figures 412 farmers committed suicide in Vidarbha in the year 2005 , while in 2006 the number of farmers committing suicide reached 1050 . In the first month of 2007 62 farmers committed suicide in vidarbha .
In July , 2006 the Prime minister visited this place and announced a special assistance of 3750 rupees .
Despite this , the series of suicides did not stop , the money granted for irrigation was not spent because of many reasons , but the biggest drawback was that there was no reliable system for setting judicious price of cotton for the farmers . Not only this the government was late in purchasing at low prices and and no measures were taken to save the farmers from the traders .
Thus the analysis presented by `` Economist `` magazine does not come up with any effective solution despite seriously admitting the problems of the Vidarbha farmers .
This effective solution can only be achieved through strong farmers ` association .
On the basis of which they can be successful in rejecting tactics of various lobbying and achieving judicious price .
The society should comprehensibly support this effort of the farmers .
Further for a long term solution on this issue we should pay attention to the views of Mahatma Gandhi which is related to the self-dependence of villages .
In this regard Hathkargha Julahas and cotton farmers have close and complementary relations .
The indigenous varieties of cotton are made available to the Julahas by the farmers .
Handloom weavers do not get worried about the raw materials in this system and the farmers growing indigenous varieties at low prices get market near their selling area .
The farmers can grow the food-grains of his choice and cotton together and indigenous cotton can be grown on relatively less fertile land .
In such a situation the possibility for small farmers to stick would be more .
Today in the midst of increasing problems due to globalization it has become necessary to keep alternative thinking alive .
According to the bulletin of world bank the tenure of growth and development commission would be of two years .
It is expected from the commission that it will increase its understanding in poverty reduction and economic growth from the perspective of development .
The bank claims that the commission is independent and unbiased .
Whatever be the claim at surface level but it is far away from reality .
If we see speeches , articles , books etc of the committee then it will be clear that they all are doused in a single ideological color .
They all are completely committed to the neo-liberal strategy of economic growth .
What was the compulsion of the world bank that it initiated the establishment of this commission .
In order to know this we have to go back a little into the past .
During the beginning of 90s John Williams rendered `` Washington consensus `` which became the ideological basis of the present day globalization .
One need not say that the active role of state in the economic system was negated and this notion was created that the market forces shall wisely and skillfully allocate the resources with which there will be great economic growth .
Consequently automatically there will be economic growth .
After the defeat of soviet Union , socialist camp and non-aligned movement America thought that it could run the world according to its will .
But the recent years ` series of events have disappointed America .
One after another Latin American countries kept refuting Washington consensus .
In many countries there the leftist have come into power who are against globalization based on Washington consensus .
The inclination towards leftism continues .
Western countries like France , Spain , Italy and Germany are vocal against it .
The romantic ideas of Thomas Fridman , `` New York Times ` s `` columnist has been wasted .
The economic differences between countries is incessantly increasing instead of reducing .
Perpetually promoted `` American dream `` within which there were talks of raising oneself through talent , passion and hard work is now in dustbins .
Paul Harris in British newspaper `` Observer `` -LRB- 8th June -RRB- writes that its a regret that the old argument -LRB- American dream -RRB- no more remains correct .
The gap between the rich and the poor has perpetually increased .
Consequently the capacity to cross this bridge has decreased .
While the salary of one American representative family has increased 18 % in the last 25 years , there has been 200 % increase in 1 % richest families .
One doesn ` t need to mention the condition of India .
The custom of genetically modified food is incessantly increasing in the world .
America is trying hard to export these food items because the producers of these products have put tremendous pressure on America to increase the export as much as possible .
But after getting many kinds of scientific information one gets to know that these processed food is not fit for human use .
After knowing the truth about it India should discourage its import .
While America is trying hard for its export through world trade organization .
Henry Miller , who has been the chief controller of American food and drug administration since 1979-1994 says that in this concern the government agencies of America did what the agricultural traders expected them to do .
The federal regulation analyst of genetically processed food in America , David skibirt says that most of the food controller of america are trusting the information of those who themselves are producers of biotech crops . And the figures given by them have not been published in any of the journals nor have they been analyzed seriously .
Our governments are also taking many steps to ease the process of yielding land to the companies .
Land ceiling acts are being loosely held and land market is being developed .
The farmers are themselves or being compelled to sell the lands due to the perpetual loss in farming and because of the way it is continuously being the farming of loss .
If the agriculture is not reformed then it will pose a big hindrance in the way of industrial development because industries are dependent on farming and labors for raw materials .
although the development of agriculture in the country is unbalanced because of which small farmers produce less and later escape from it .
The problem of incessantly increasing population also adds to these problems .
Because of this the escape rate among farmers has increased .
The result of these things in agriculture is that the difference between farmers and corporate professionals increases .
The foundation of India-America knowledge was initiated in 2005 when Dr . Manmohan Singh and George Bush had signed the Agriculture technology agreement .
While addressing both the houses of American Parliament during his America visit Dr . Manmohan singh said that in India green revolution helped many people get rid of poverty . I am glad to say that me and President Bush have decided to initiate the second phase of India-America assistance in the field of agriculture .
After the agreement , a team of agriculture scientists from India went to America on December , 2005 to determine the methods of the implementation of this program .
Indo-America knowledge initiative in the field of agriculture has been started at such a time when Indian agriculture is undergoing tough times .
Under this initiative there is technology transfer arrangement for Indian agriculture sector therefore it is absolutely important for India . one thing which nobody is realizing is that how will this modern American technology be used in a country like India where 80 % of its population is somehow leading life .
The complete weft of second green revolution is weaved near the benefits of American agriculture trade .
The multinational companies -LRB- and Indian agricultural research council also -RRB- who are are planning to give new technologies are so ultra modern that farmers at large will not be able to get its benefit .
Although the council has publicly said that from earning farming it is leading towards contract farming but the truth is that no effective debate is held in this country on the socio-economic and political price on earning through farming .
The average income of a farmer in 1993 was just Rs . 211 .
In other words if we assume that there are five members in a farming family then 99 % of the farmers fall in the category of poor and weak class .
And the most surprising thing is that during the last few years the real income of marginal labors has fallen down even from the minimum wages of daily workers .
Is it not the time that the farmers also get a fixed amount of money every month for his h e ?
Altogether he is producing economic resources for the country and he needs sufficient compensation .
There is only one way of economic stability in agricultural sector , that is the boundaries of sixth pay commission should be increased and either the farmers should be included in it or a separate salary commission should be framed for them .
The minimum land should be made the basis and production should be ignored .
On one side there are those people who have a romantic notion of villages where everything is going perfectly well .
They do not want this scene to change .
From the old kind of naxalites to the new kinds of NGOs everyone is saying the same thing .
Posters , booklets , songs , processions , demonstrations are being led by them .
Opposition is itself a big trade .
They can not see that the income is perpetually decreasing from agriculture .
Raising the lifestyle though farming is very far , it is even difficult to keep it safe .
They are unable to see that the world that today ` s generation of farmers are facing does not have romantic kind of villages but market circulated trade .
On the extreme there are people who assume that the government should only be the agent of bureaucrats and industrialists .
If TATA wants land , the government should get it .
If any industrialist of Indonesia needs a place the government should get it .
Giving lands might be the responsibility of the the government but it is whose responsibility to set proper conditions .
The industrialists are not doing any work of donation .
They are asking for land to set up factories .
The rate of land that the industrialists procure reach skies in few years only .
The farmers are not benefitted from it .
It is necessary to make the farmers understand that how giving land would be a profitable deal for t m ?
Therefore some creative suggestions should be thought .
People have started moving to other sectors leaving farming .
According to a survey 57 % of people want to get rid of farming .
Will it be fair to let anyone die taking away their unproductive land or taking advantage of urbanization .
People are trying other elective everywhere .
Therefore adopting special economic region as an elective won ` t be inappropriate .
While building sage millions of youngsters will get job in non agricultural sector .
The villagers can choose a better job in cities by selling their unproductive land for sage .
Seeing the plight of farming and increasing problems of farmers national farmers commission has made many significant recommendations .
But the question is that up to which extent will the government implement them .
The commission had given its first report in April this year .
Now it has given even the fifth that is the final report to the central agriculture ministry .
The commission was established during the regime of previous government .
With much enthusiasm the UPA government reorganized it in 2004 under the chairmanship of popular scientist M . S. Swaminathan and the responsibility of framing its strategic format to save the interest of the farmers was assigned .
But the draft of national farmer commission consists of many such suggestions which can prove to be difficult for the government .
During 1994-95 the annual consumption of cereals was 180 kg which reduced to 176.5 kgs in 2001 .
The affluent people get 2100 to 2636 calories of diet while the diet of poor has reduced to 1890 calories .
According to the planning commission 23.62 of the people live below the poverty line in urban population while in rural areas it is just 27 . 09 % .
All the claims of economic progress of a country are false whose 27 crore population can not even fulfill four square meal .
Therefore the government should keep a sharp eye on the agricultural production and marketing of India .
It is the duty of the state to provide everyone with healthy diet therefore it needs to maintain a balance between the profitable price of farmer ` s produce and supply of cereals according to the buying capacity of the poor .
There are many government schemes that are based on food grains such as Rashan Card , midday meal for poor children , employment guarantee scheme etc .
Because of this the government has to buy cereals . There are a total of 11 states in the country where abundance of paddy and wheat are produced and the food corporation buys cereals from these states .
The rest of the states are deficit states .
For the past three years the production of wheat has stuck to 7 crore metric tonnes .
In the new world arrangement it is not only mandatory for the farmers to buy seeds from the multinational companies but it is also a reason behind their plight .
If Reliance buys the apples of Himachal , the farmers will be benefitted from this , the intermediaries will end but will it benefit the common n ?
The apples of Himachal are popular among common people since it is relatively cheaper than the apples of Kashmir .
After the purchase of reliance won ` t these apples be expensive and beyond the reach of common peo e ?
Undoubtedly it is the responsibility of the government to keep an eye on this but its role as a manager now is not satisfying .
It is remarkable that WTO is such an organization of the countries of the world which believes in making trade and commerce intuitive and easy .
Though WTO became effective since 1st January ,1995 but in reality it came into existence in the year 1947 by the signatories of `` a multilateral trade system , General agreement on tariff and trade -LRB- GATT -RRB- through the Urugway round of trade negotiations .
GATT negotiations were limited to tariff reductions for the trade and reach of commodities to market .
The members of WTO countries started Doha round trade negotiation in 2001 for subsidies tariff reductions , other obstacles of trade and encouraging economy of developing countries .
This negotiation has to end in the year 2004 but the various governments of member countries could not adhere to this time limit .
Consequently this talk kept moving forward and in December , 2005 in Hong Kong a decision was taken in WTO meeting that a new agreement in the tariff reduction of agriculture and commodities trade .
If we evaluate the profits of developing countries under WTO we see that the developing countries of the world are hardly getting any significant benefit .
Majority of the developing countries have now remained pure cereal importer .
Their livelihood related to farming has suffered severe loss .
In India he had reviewed the Urugway round of GATT negotiations as a major economist of World Bank , since then he has found that both the agenda and consequences of WTO are against developing countries .
The developing countries can not be dumb for not seeing concrete benefits from WTO system , they should proceed on the path of open market agreements -LRB- FTA -RRB- .
Currently there are more than 400 FTA in the world .
Now it is necessary for the organizations like G-20 to warn developed countries like America and European organizations for the benefit of developing countries including India . is if at all the right of the developing countries regarding lowering the tax on industrial products under WTO are violated , then all kinds of talks related to the work list of Doha talk shall be stopped .
It is remarkable that with the vision of making world a global village WTO , is such a world organization which aims to make trade and commerce intuitive and easy .
Though WTO became effective since 1st January , 1995 but in reality it came into existence in the year 1947 by the signatories of `` a multilateral trade system , General agreement on tariff and trade -LRB- GATT -RRB- through the Urugway round of trade negotiations .
While GATT negotiations were restricted to tariff reductions for the trade and reach of goods to the market , while WTO seems to move ahead and make efforts for the effectiveness of world trade rules and make agricultural services and talks more extensive .
Till now the developing countries were putting huge taxes on the import of industrial products and services while these taxes are less on agricultural goods .
In the Doha round , the developed countries asked the developing countries that if they reduce the import tax on industrial produce and services , the developed countries would reduce the import tax on agricultural goods in their countries .
Agriculture is your strength and you will get big market for agricultural produce with this , while we will get open market for industrial produce and services .
The developed countries are persistently emphasizing that the developing countries should curtail the tax on non agricultural products , in short it is called non agricultural market exchange .
For the Delhi World trade , negotiations between G4 countries has started .
Once again tug of war between the rich and the poor countries has started .
There are disagreements on the issue of giving concessions in agricultural sector between developing and developed countries .
While the developing countries want the developed countries to reduce the farm subsidies being given to their farmers so that the goods of developing countries could be sold in developed countries , while developed countries want to get more and more market of developing countries .
During Kankun World trade meeting in 2003 , the then commerce minister of India , arun Jaitley announced that he will not be ready for any agreement until farm subsidy being given to rich countries persists .
But while reaching the last phase -LRB- which was finally unsuccessful due to the boycott of African countries -RRB- of the talk India compromised for many inappropriate agreements .
Kamalnath is also walking on the footprints of his antecedent .
After wrapping up the July 2004 framework hastily , in which rich countries were allowed to increase their agricultural assistance . Kamalnath was against reconsidering the agreement because it only contained the issues of the development of developed countries .
Right before the ministerial level meeting organized in Hong Kong in 2005 , Kamalnath had announced that there will not be any real reduction in the agriculture subsidy through proposal put by America .
It will be a real curtailment when the amount of government treasure that America gets will reduce .
For stable agricultural development small farmers are needed , rather it can be said that a secure stable development for a longer from the point of view of environment time without small farmers is not possible .
The big farm agriculture done with the help of machines is able to give more produce in less time but it fails to maintain the fertility of soil .
The development of agriculture in human civilization was basically done by small farmers .
Generations after generations they ploughed a land to maintain the fertility of the soil .
It is very essential that the small farmers get stronger role in farmer organizations , if it does not happens then the small farmers can also begin new farmer organizations .
There should be mutual co-ordination between small farmer organizations of various countries so that they strengthen their voices against world level unjust agriculture , food grain , trade policies and rules and regulations .
It is unfortunate that until now both capitalist and communist systems have been doing injustice to small farmers .
In Tissue culture laboratory the the plants are grown in totally controlled environment .
Before building this laboratory one should determine the shape and size of professional and research laboratory .
Further it should also be determined that how many plants can be prepared with this laboratory .
Generally research and professional laboratories are similar .
Further the requirement of the equipment and machinery used in the growth of every plant used in the laboratory is similar .
Generally the place with less fluctuation in temperature and moderate climate is chosen for the establishment of laboratory .
In such situations hilly and valley areas are suitable .
Further electricity arrangements should be primarily taken care of .
The place where adequate electricity is available at cheaper rate should be preferred .
Tissue growth section is the major section of laboratory .
The size and shape of this section depends upon the growth of the plants .
The floor and walls of simple growth section should have tiles .
In this section , there should be facility of moving laminar flow and nutritive medium and grown medium to growth section .
This section should have two Air conditioners so that the temperature of the section could be maintained uniformly .
Further the roof of the section should have two ultraviolet tube light .
Generally nutritive medium section is made in the middle of the laboratory .
This section should be bigger than tissue growth section and growth section so that adequate space is there to build growth medium .
There should be a wooden table with granite top where the growth medium making work could be safely done .
There should be arrangements for cupboards on the walls of the section where chemicals could be kept .
pH meter : The acidity and the alkalinity of the nutritive medium could be examined and brought to a fixed pH .
Refrigerator : It is helpful in saving heat sensitive chemical and growth hormone while preparing growth medium .
Two refrigerators should be used as per the requirement .
Electronic balance : This weighing machine is primarily used to weigh such chemical which are used in micro amounts .
This section is primarily used in professional laboratory .
This section should be built in the last part of the laboratory adjoining the nutritive medium section of laboratory building .
In order to keep part of this section bacteria-free , the walls and floors of the section should be fitted with tiles .
The size of this section should be kept smaller than the above mentioned three sections .
The roof of this section should have two ultra violet , 3 feet long tube lights .
There should be medium light according to the requirement .
This section should have two air-conditioners which should work automatically after every 15 hours .
Autoclave section is that part of the laboratory where the nutritive medium is made germ free through this equipment .
This part of the section should be built bigger as compared to other sections .
Two-pronged autoclave should be placed in such a way in the section that one part should be towards middle storage and the back portion of the autoclave should open in autoclave section , the middle part should be completely sealed .
There should be a 6 feet long fiber window beside the germ-free section of the laboratory which could be opened and closed .
It is used to make the nutritive vehicle microbe-free and filtration of contaminated nutritive vehicle .
Through the back portion of autoclave , the vehicle is loaded with the help of trolley .
This autoclave can be run through LPG and electricity both .
The filtered vehicle can be directly taken to storage section through the next door .
There has been a significant impact of the recent liberalization of Indian economy on the development of bio-technology industry .
Micro-amplification of plants through tissue culture has proved to be excessive successful and popular medium of economic development .
There has been commercialization of micro-amplification technique at world level , especially in countries with industrial agriculture .
According to the received figures more than 796 commercial companies of the world are associated with such activities that their numbers are persistently increasing .
Approximately 90 crore saplings are annually produced .
Today tissue culture industry is primarily fulfilling the requirements of flower agriculture and garden-agriculture sector .
In fact tissue culture industry is the backbone of flower agriculture and garden agriculture industry .
There is flower consumption , primarily in developed countries and it is mostly dependent on social , economic and cultural factors .
Tissue culture companies are increasing in the world and around 90 crore plants are being produced in this sector .
The potential demand of seeds for agriculture , agriculture-flowers and forestry crops in the world is 160 billion plants every year .
The gross market is 40 billion US$ annually .
There are around 120 registered companies in India but only 30 are available with their products in the market .
The annual production is approximately 5 crores .
The production capacity in tissue culture depends on many factors such as multiplication rate , transfer cycle , efficiency of workers , cost incurred etc .
The cost price could be reduced by developing profitable techniques professionally with persistent research and development .
Micro-amplification is very beneficial in the places where other methods of amplification do not work such as Strawberry or those plants where the production of micro-amplified plant is more than traditional plants like banana and cardamom .
For the multiplication of highly specialized species at large level , with the objective of presenting tissue culture technology , in 1989 the biotechnological department had established two tissue culture pilot machines , TATA energy research Institute , New Delhi -LRB- T.E.R.I. -RRB- and National chemical laboratory , Pune -LRB- N.C. .
These two services as national services were established with the prime objective of multiplication through tissue culture of highly specialized forest trees .
Every pilot plant had the capacity to produce 10 million saplings .
The initial figures say that in 95-98 % micro-amplified plants the growth is successful .
The chief objective of running field testing at many places was to study the usefulness of various clones in different agricultural climatic regions .
With the obtained results , best growing highly specialized clones were identified at a particular place .
Tissue cultured plants are seen to have cloning similarity up to 90 % in almost all matters .
The wood volume of tissue cultured plants was 45 cub met high and it had received 38.91 more wood price because of which there was 42 % more pure profit .
The chief objective of various sapling species the field evaluation especially of forest trees is to test genetic integrity of tissue cultured plants .
Acclimation process is a major hindrance from the perspective of special needs concerning various agricultural climatic regions in the multiplicity of forest trees and other plants through tissue culture .
For the effective salvage of these matters the department has given preference to relatively smaller acclimation units fulfilling the requirements in special agricultural meteorological regions .
But six acclimation units have been established in Jodhpur , Hissar , Kolkata , Jammu and Guwahati .
In the beginning the program concentrated on the species of forest trees which later extended to garden agriculture and planting crops .
The study centers roughly 65 species and for approximately 20 species , protocols of complete technology have been standardized .
The domain appraisal of some protocols is still going on and roughly 10 species are being grown successfully at professional level .
The technology industry have been transferred for the professional production of these species through tissue culture .
Though the micro-amplification technique of vegetative propagation was developed through somatic embryo but the plats thus developed could not be acclimatized .
Therefore research on this subject has been stopped .
Amplification protocol for coffee , tea and spices have been developed and there is need to control the biological and non-biological stress of these crops . Also procreation liquid is being listed through molecular sign .
A top priority of the department has been establishment of acclimatization units which fulfill the needs of various agricultural climatic regions .
According to an estimate roughly 300 professional laboratories are functioning in the world .
The production capacity of majority of new laboratories is 2 million plants .
In India roughly 125 micro-amplified laboratories were established out of which 81 laboratories are working and 44 were have been shut .
Roughly 25 laboratories in Maharashtra , 9 in Karnataka , 6 in Andhra Pradesh , 7 in Gujarat and TamilNadu and 4 in Kerala are running .
Small laboratories are running in Uttar Pradesh -LRB- 4 -RRB- , Sikkim , Panjab -LRB- 1 -RRB- , Haryana -LRB- 3 -RRB- and Assam but their production capacity is less .
Roughly 15 laboratories are amplifying only garden crops .
Anthuriam , Kailanthe , Dieffenbachia , Ficus , cardiline , orchid , gerbera are major ornamental plants .
The proper use of agricultural land is an significant aspect of geographical study .
They are primarily concerned with geographical agriculture .
The word land use is automatically clear .
But in the use and the interpretation of the purpose of their options poses many complexes .
It has been considered the best as the word use is small .
According to the natural characteristics of the land , land use is the real and special use of land surface .
Land use study is primarily concerned with the shortfall of vegetation cover .
It is a formal concept in the field of geography .
Land plan is the process of exploitation of land use that is land is applied for a specific theme .
The undeveloped areas by humans are negative from the perspective of land plan .
Testing without coordinating the works of vegetation cover from the point of view of use is considered to be a nonsensical and insignificant practice .
Land use-It is a process .
That is using the land surface through land cover .
The `` Land Cover `` is used in this text for `` Surface cover `` elements , whether they are natural or man made .
Land use is the comprehensive meaning of Land-plan .
It includes Land cover .
It would be appropriate to incorporate all kinds of uses in the extensive study of land use .
The surveys of land use should always be noted for the need of experts and also the unaware because land use survey is a n expensive venture and today land use is affects everybody in one form or another .
Using land using different experiments is as ancient is the relationship of agriculture with humans .
Interest was taken in interval estimation of land resources because of the investment in new countries .
In 1919 for the first time maps expressing land use in systematic manner was considered .
Forests have been classified in the form of cluster forests , high forests and clusters .
It includes such forests which do not have any pre planted harvesting whether they are conical , deciduous or mixed forests .
Classifying manipulated pastures from the point of view of land management in the form of agricultural land is appropriate but it as led to some problems in interpretation .
All the grasslands were kept in the same category after the survey done in 1938 in northern Ireland , whether it has changes or best quality pasture is found .
Because of sufficient extension a new category was started for the below mentioned green land .
Though the extension of garden is not significant in great Britain .
Many reports were written to describe every kind of land in Britain .
It was also published in parts during 1936-1946 .
Thus the time between beginning regional work and completion of reports seems more .
Gardens are written with pastures and tree-crops are written together .
Because of the problems of grass field all kinds of fodders are kept in the same category .
Some reforms for grass lands with tumor grass or fiber grass have been done .
Global land use survey is a planning prepared by the international geographical union .
Its objective is to prepare land use report and relative map for the entire world .
One of the objectives of land use is to encourage the mapping of world land use on the standard of 1:1,000,000 .
The objective of the proposed basic categories limit number was to achieve essential category of comparison in survey and arranging desired subsections for local details .
Though the major classification of nine categories presents numerous problems in the generalization of surveys for rebuilding maps .
The main land use maps of Britain were reduced on 1:625,000 standards to get general conclusion .
At least an area of 100 acres could be shown on this standard .
That is why nearby farms were broken into pieces and their measurement was made as it was before .
It was necessary to have at least 200 acre or 100 hec area to get general conclusion on 1:1,000,000 standards .
so far many countries have prepared land use maps on various standards .
Certainly currently work is going on in these countries on this issue .
There is lack of authenticity because of the association of many officers , different issues and adopting many methods in few national surveys .
The state gives some surveys of national planning on contract to the private companies .
These surveys do not aim at publication .
In the present scenario the extended regions could be surveyed through air photography .
No one raise finger on the significance of land survey for practical works .
There are many examples of its application in physical planning .
An interesting text has been prepared with the work details of Anglo-Polish Geographical Seminar .
It has potential scope from British survey for mapping land use development in a planned economy .
Its very simple scientific objective is to study those methods with which human system uses human environment .
Necessarily it is a geographical study which can only be completed through land use survey .
This survey presents the basis for using geographical environment with more intellect .
It is its more practical significance .
Agriculture geography is still developing .
Few years back it also included previous botanical science especially Phytosocilogy .
Thus Polish survey majorly views the objective of land use survey and region .
It clarifies the meanings of words like land cover and land use -LRB- with what meaning they are used here -RRB- .
It also clarifies the figures of the background and also the shapes of the farms .
Generally such figures are presented using various maps .
It is essential for them to be like glass coverings .
In order to explain the interrelationships with ease they should be used with coverings such as physical conditions , transportation capacity and outlay .
Presenting such details on basic land use maps has been predefined purpose of Poland maps so that practical planning could be helped .
In land use maps it is essential to emphasize the association of presented product with actual illustration .
Since land use map marks the land use of any time , basically they can not do anything other than drawing general picture of land views .
Since grass is grown in a field for an year , cereals can be grown in it the next year therefore the map becomes untimely before publication .
The failure of land use comes up because of not understanding such maps .
This technique is criticized on this basis .
Interchange of crops in any of the seasons expresses Rotation and this interchange compensates this shortcoming because of the thus changes in other farms .
The stability patterns of technologically changing countries like great Britain could be explained in comparison to maps of various dates .
Thus a single land use map can be assumed to be a authentic document for many years .
The duration of its authenticity depends on the nature and rate of change .
The meaning of recording physical beauty is that there is no such signal in the land use map which proves whether land use is according to its quality or not .
Some specific cases could be its exceptions such as fluctuation relation .
Using yellow color to show the non arable land and rugged pasture in highlands of Scotland expresses that satisfying land use is found at 3000 feet height .
Soil is not the only physical component in the fertility of soil .
Many plans of land outlook classification for estimating the means of land have been developed .
The objective of classifying land outlook is to propose the potentiality of productivity or non-productivity of every tested land section .
Such a separation could be to determine that the particular land area is used for less dense grassland and it should be left for reforestation planning , reformed cultivation or it should be left undeveloped .
While as a demonstrator it clarifies whether that land area should be conserved for present use or permission should be allowed to construct a building there .
It is prepared for reforestation agricultural development or a species of a tree or crop .
Land outlook classification is an example presented by United Nations soil Conservation which is primarily based on erosion hazards .
Its objective is qualitative proposition of land for agriculture and separator conservation .
It has accepted eight categories within it .
Its primary category is `` appropriate land for farming `` .
Land appropriate for farming .
First category - excellent land , which is plowed through simple agricultural methods in intact form .
Second Category - Such land which is plowed with limited precaution in intact form .
Third Category-Under the third kind of land there are restrictions in use but they can be plowed regularly by keeping precaution in soil erosion crisis .
Fourth Category - such land which is used in too harsh restricted methods .
The farms can be restricted to relevant crops by keeping strict monitoring .
It needs crop rotation in five-six years .
Further sowing grain or uncerne is often practical .
Fifth category - the fifth category consists of such land which is roughly plain but because of wetness , gravels and other reasons agriculture was not possible on it .
Because of some restrictions forest arrangement and grazing is not possible in such a land .
Sixth Category-This category consists of such land which is dry , rugged and wet or which is unfit for farming .
Such kind of land can be plowed most adequately for establishing grassland .
Tree crops can be sown in few lands .
Seventh category - Pasture or forest system under harsh restrictions or strict erosion crisis is the characteristic of this land use .
In this category erosion rate is more fast as compared to the fourth category because of withering of cover .
Because of conservation purpose , forest system is preferred over pasture .
Eighth category - This land is considered inappropriate for forest system pasture and farming .
It consists of swamps , rugged land , deserts and high hills .
This land is useful only for wild animals , recreation and water course if proper watershed measures are taken .
The significance of such classification is seen where soil erosion and other crisis limit agriculture .
For comprehensive planning of land use it is essential to use a separate factor deduced from the major factors of environment .
A land use classification planning generally tries to express natural qualities hidden in land .
Regarding soil it can be assumed that while determining the potential value of land physical elements of soil are more helpful as compared to the chemical elements .
The nutritional status of soil can be completely artificial which means it depends on the management system and use of manures .
If depth , water , formation , drainage etc . characteristics are satisfying then the nutritional status of such land which is inborn worst can be built up .
The land productivity lowers because of specific soil status or bad impact of one or more factors of soil .
While determining the classification system for land use in tropical area one should note that they have opposite conditions as compared to temperate area .
Land classification in temperate zone has developed a lot .
The methods used in temperate lands could guide the surveyors in tropical land as simple principles .
Some factors have completely different impact there .
For example progress in height in temperate regions generally has bad impact .
While in tropical regions it is beneficial .
Definitely vegetation climate and soil are popular as significant indicator .
If one knows about the habitat factors of vegetation species and its associates then it can be used in a simple way .
While estimating the soil fertility in temperate regions physical characteristics are more significant as compared to chemical status .
Nitrogen , phosphate potash and lime can be regularly supplied in large amounts to commercial crops .
From economic perspective doing this is possible because profitable commodity region for commercial farming is available there .
It is known through various sources that there has been steep depreciation in the fertility of tropical soil under cultivation .
The depreciation is especially fast in wet forests .
There was biennial regular crop rotation of maize and cassava in Ghana for eight years .
It was undertaken in the absence of impact of fertilizers .
After the fourth cycle of the produce of both the crop rotation , the mature accessories were removed .
It is estimated that in the serial order in Malaya , the rice land produces 1500-200 , 1200 and 820 pounds of paddy .
The benefit of manure used in farms is only for few months while in temperate regions it yields benefit for roughly three years .
Therefore the practical classification of tropical lands should have class differences .
Goru has written that if the composition of soil is appropriate then tropical cultivation can fulfill its requirements through bad soil only .
By that he meant to say that the soil composition is completely in powder form there .
It is such a general conclusion which can not be completely applicable to all tropical plants but it should follow the criteria of classification .
It is difficult to bring artificial changes in the soil for a longer time later .
But it is related to the age and maturity of soil .
Goru has mentioned that very special high quality soils are riverine alluvium .
They are extremely new accumulation .
They flow and come from those regions where there is no tropical season corrosion .
Reform-able land should be kept away from such land where there is no scope of reform .
Laterite and such soils in which laterite elements are not so developed should be considered worst .
Because of the availability of water crops grow in the coastal strip of sterile sand .
But it has been accepted that the development of forest resources pasture cultivation will take time .
Other forms of production should be developed during this time .
It is essential to do this keeping the needs of economic condition in mind .
It has been suggested that for a decade or two rice lime septal fruit , fruits and for cocoa production special efforts should be undertaken .
They are sold in regions of export to get financial aid for a longer time .
Certainly the land shouldn ` t be badly used intentionally for saving time .
For such problems used soils under systematic pasture would be more productive .
For the development of this region it has been suggested that for the long time planning of this area one should concentrate on the cattle rearing and it is clarified with examples of land scope mapping .
Though the farmers will require seed sowing concerning directions while sowing seeds .
For this commodity systems are also required here then only self confidence among the farmers regarding the future of this industry could be activated .
But the instantaneous need of this place is of a reliable cash crop which shouldn ` t get more significance except executor crop in the economy of this region .
Planting high terrestrial rice has been recommended to achieve the target in this region .
There is a region in south where there was profit in the production of banana and pineapple but they could not achieve regular commodity sector .
Marshy rice is grown near the coastal pit of Varanako .
Attention should be paid to the scope of building grassland for cattle rearing in this sector .
The export of acrobat , cattle wealth and rice will be easy with the building of pier for ships .
Attention should be paid on the production of such crops where there is less loss in transportation .
The potential rice land could be more productive there .
The authentic produce clarifies the average produce in the remote and well developed soil areas of United Nations where paddy are the major produce .
According to the local significance of every crop , the simple percentage weighting equal to the production section crop gradation could be deduced .
Such soils whose average weight is between 100-90 are kept in section 1 , those between 90-80 are kept in section 2 and accordingly .
The Storie Index is an estimation method .
This method is used in United Nations and other countries .
This method depends upon the soil quality .
The major characteristics of quality are determined in three factors .
One of those factors is surface formation .
Everything is quoted in the form of estimated percentage of optimum conditions of that plant ` s growth .
Now it is assumed in Soviet union that for high production from the state and collective farms it is essential to pay attention on the produce of various land classes and outlays .
The lands are classified together with various kinds of land on the basis of similarity in different classes but distinction in fertility and work ability .
Agriculture is divided into two classes on the basis of supply of arable land .
Dense farming - Such kinds of farming are found in those lands where there is less extension of arable land and the population density is more .
Because of the high pressure of population in these areas the per person arable land is very less .
With the help of dense plowing , sufficient irrigation facility , investment , labor , high supply of fertilizers and scientific equipment more than one crop can be grown in a year and efforts are undertaken to increase per hectare production .
Crop rotation , high quality seeds , insecticide etc . are arranged to get achieve more production .
These regions have small farms and emphasis is laid on production of food grains with which more and more people are sustained .
These areas with dense cultivation are populated since ancient times and with centuries of experiments the farmers have developed this dense cultivation technique and land use .
These areas are centers of rivers-valleys and more rich population .
Because of more population there is abundance of cheap labor .
Therefore farmers have adopted dense cultivation .
Rice is the major crop in such cultivation which is grown twice or thrice a year in some areas .
extensive farming is found in those land areas where there are more lands or density population is relatively low .
The objectives of farmers in these areas are obtaining more and more production from the big farms .
The production of crops in these extended cultivation regions is done from the perspective of trade .
The specialization of crops takes place on farms .
Two or three crops could be grown in an year for sustenance where only a single crop dominated an extensive cultivated area .
The scarcity of labor is fulfilled through machines .
Extensive cultivation is popular in the remote areas of Russia -LRB- Stapis -RRB- , Prairie -LRB- Canada -RRB- , southern and middle United states of America and Pampas -LRB- Argentina -RRB- .
Wheat is a major crop which is sown in winter or spring season .
Wet cultivation - wet cultivation areas are those where there is 200 cm or more rains .
The moisture supply of the plants is fulfilled by rain .
Rice leads in wet cultivation .
In this method there is water logging in farms for several months .
Because of the abundance of humidity three crops of rice are obtained round the year -LRB- Aman , Aas and Boro -RRB- .
In such cultivated areas , the highest raining areas of Asia are accumulated where east India , Bangladesh and Srilanka are leading .
There is more and more reliability in the production of crops .
Majority of the areas in Europe , America and Asia are concerned with wet cultivation .
Cultivated area capable of irrigation .
Those areas where there is low rainfall need more irrigation such as monsoon and tropical region .
Because of season and unreliable rains irrigation occupies a significant position in the cultivation of these areas .
The places where there is low rainfall or it is limited to a specific season , the temperature is appropriate for cultivation round the year .
Therefore irrigation is essential and obligatory for more production .
Irrigation is also done through ponds , wells , rivers and canals .
Tube wells are also used for irrigation .
The development of irrigation is highest in India and China .
There is tradition of irrigated cultivation in countries like United States of America , Turkey , Mediterranean region and Russia etc .
cultivation with scarce rainfall .
It refers to that cultivation where rainfall is less than 50 cm . and means of irrigation are not available .
This method first came into existence in Great Basin of USA , Columbia Basin and Snake river Basin .
Under this technique the farms are plowed deep -LRB- 20-25 cm .
So that the rainfall gets absorbed in soil and there is less depreciation of moisture through vaporization .
Therefore the crops of dry cultivation are dependent on moisture present in the soil .
For moisture large beds are build to regulate the flow of rainwater .
Thus Jetzold , 1979 calls it water concentrating culture .
The crops which could resist dryness , got prepared soon and could save themselves from harmful insects are planted in this area .
The soil is made moist with the help of manures and fertilizers .
Wheat is the most appropriate crop for this area .
Apart from wheat mustard , barley and oat are also produced .
Millet , sorghum , barley , chickpea are the major crops of dry cultivation areas of India .
single crop cultivation refers to producing a single crop from the land in a year .
This cultivation is carried in big gardens .
The single crop cultivation in that particular area is helped by economic , physical and other factors of agricultural development .
Though appropriate conditions are not salient for a single crop but from the perspective of management , labor and market the garden of a single crop are found in abundance .
Two crops obtained from a single region is known as twin crop cultivation .
Densely populated regions with appropriate physical condition have twin crop area .
Winter and summer -LRB- Rabi and Kharif -RRB- crops are found in the river built plains of south east Asia .
Multi crop cultivation - This kind of cultivation is carried in those land areas where more than two crops are harvested in a year .
Multi crop cultivation is possible in developed and dense cultivation areas .
This kind of cultivation requires high quality fertilizer , seeds , irrigation facility , crop rotation , appropriate climate and mechanics .
Such kind of cultivation is popular in many parts of India , China and United States of America .
Commercial cultivation - Such kind of cultivation is the gift of modern development .
The physical conditions are most favorable if a single crop is grown at a large level at the place of growing multiple crops in commercial cultivation in travel and transportation resources as a result of knowledge expansion of science and technology .
Majority of the produced product is exported .
Commercial cultivation is the collective form of extensive , dense and mixed cultivation .
Crop production and cattle rearing are parallely carried in mixed cultivation .
Because of the lack of human labor there is greater use of machines in cultivation .
Such kind of cultivation is found in the inner parts of northern hemisphere and coastal parts of southern hemisphere where USA and Prairie -LRB- Canada -RRB- , Ukraine and Ural regions are famous for commercial cultivation .
Further such cultivation is found in the valleys of Parana-Paraguay in south America and Mare - Darling in Australia .
Plantation cultivation - This technique of cultivation is special and relatively new which began in tropical and subtropical regions of southern hemisphere .
Broadly the characteristics of plantation cultivation is prominence of a crop , special cultivation method -LRB- plantation and seed sowing -RRB- .
Under this big gardens of tea , coconut , cocoa , sugarcane , cassava , spices , banana , rubber , etc . are planted .
All the crops in this kind of cultivation is such that their industrial amendment is essential .
Industrial places are established near the gardens for economic benefits .
The entire production of such gardens are exported to temperate countries where there is high demand for them .
Traditional cultivation - Such kind of cultivation is especially popular in 5 degree-10 degree latitude in Congo Basin -LRB- Middle Africa -RRB- , Amazon Basin -LRB- South america -RRB- , south east Asia and highlands of eastern islands .
It is also known as migratory cultivation , shifting cultivation and Jhooming cultivation .
First of all for the preparation of farm , remote areas of forest are chosen and burnt .
Human labor is mostly used in cultivation .
Fertilizers and investment is not used .
Agriculture work is possible only for two years after which another farms are prepared leaving the previous one . Because rate of soil erosion is more due to more rainfall and soil fertility soon becomes poor .
There is less production in this kind of agriculture , labor is more and the use of produced goods is local .
Only food grains are produced where maize , paddy , sorghum and millet are major .
Agriculture has a great contribution in the economy of the country .
Currently the agricultural share of economy of the country is continuously decreasing .
According to an estimation the total GDP of agriculture in the country in the year 1998-99 ,1999 -2000 , 2000-01 was 6.3 , 6.1 , 4.0 and 5.4 % respectively .
It is clear that despite the large contribution of of agriculture in national economy , it is gradually decreasing .
The significance of agriculture in our country could be understood in the fact that it supplies raw materials to Indian industries .
The major industries of the country are dependent only on cultivation .
Majority of the raw material for non agriculture sector is obtained from agricultural sector .
Jute , cotton clothes , sugar , vegetables etc are directly and many other industries are indirectly dependent on agriculture .
Because of the population expansion in our country four square meal has become a basic need .
This requirement could only be fulfilled by agriculture .
Animal is the priceless asset of Indian farmers .
The accomplishment of agricultural tasks in the lack of animals is not possible .
Cattle and agriculture complement each other .
Our country has the highest number of cattle .
Agriculture has the biggest contribution in Indian economy .
The progress of the country mostly depends on the progress of agriculture .
Its main reason is that agriculture provides raw materials to major industries .
If the agricultural production increases then the industries will get more raw materials which will lead to its development .
If the agricultural production will increase , the income of farmers will increase and when their income will increase their buying capacity will increase .
Agriculture is significant in obtaining royality .
The production affects transportation , marketing , & other aspects and the use has deep impact on the economic system of the country .
The central government earns by export and the state governments earns through tax on revenue , irrigation and agricultural asset etc .
Agriculture is the basis of livelihood of more than half population of the country .
64 % share of the total working population of the country gets its livelihood from agriculture .
Characteristic of food grain crops - 64 % share of the total agricultural land of the country is used in the production of crops .
Scarcity in production-India does not produce as much produce in agriculture as it should produce .
It is low both from hectare and per labor perspective .
According to the received figures the average wheat production of India in a unit area is 1 th of England and 1 of France and east & west Germany .
India occupies the 17th position in the world in rice production sector .
It has been 53 years of management for India but still there is much dependence on monsoon .
Because of the irregularity , uncertainty and insufficiency of rains Indian cultivation is also known as the gamble of monsoon .
Still 33.3 % of the total agricultural land is irrigated , the rest 66.7 % is dependent on monsoon .
As a means of livelihood - Majority of our farmers do not cultivate from commercial point of view but it is a means of earning their livelihood .
Labor dominance - Labor has dominance in comparison to investment in Indian agriculture .
Because of small holdings the farmer is unable to fully use the investments and agricultural equippments .
First five year plan and agriculture - First five year plan in our country was introduced on 1st April , 1951 .
The prime objective of this scheme was to develop agriculture .
Two reasons were primarily responsible for this - Because of the partition of the country there was bad impact on commercial crops like food grains , jute and cotton .
It was felt that total development of agriculture is essential for industrial progress .
During the scheme there were three major characteristics concerning agricultural planning which are .
Long term schemes were emphasized .
The objective of the scheme was not only increasing agricultural production but the overall village lifestyle development .
The work of organizing agriculture schemes and managing irrigation and concerned means were completely given to the state governments .
The responsibility of the central government was to establish coordination in schemes run by various state governments .
Second five year plan and agriculture - The second five year plan began in 1956 .
Under this the development of industries were given preference yet the significance of increasing agricultural production was not lowered .
From the perspective of agricultural planning this scheme had following characteristics .
Agricultural planning should be done in such a way that the increasing population should get food grains with it and the industries should get raw materials .
The agricultural production should be diversified which means attention should be paid in increasing commercial crops along with cereals .
Agricultural production should be increased with skillful means and advanced techniques .
Third five year plan and agriculture - Under the third five year plan agricultural development was made the major objective .
Fourth five year plan and agriculture - Agricultural development has been given priority in this five year plan .
Not only this in the fourth plan emphasis was laid on the development of those industries also which provide agricultural inputs , fertilizers etc .
Fifth five year plan and agriculture - In this five year plan the development of agriculture got adequate significance and every year a goal of 4.67 % growth was set in agricultural sector .
In the sixth five year plan the following steps for agricultural science were primarily taken .
Dry land farming - During 1970-71 dry land agricultural development program was initiated .
In the sixth plan special emphasis was laid on increasing agricultural production under this program .
Research in agricultural education - There should be a coordination between agricultural development departments and agricultural universities .
The agricultural universities will have to play a significant role in the form of essential systematic research from the perspective of stable production and desirable development in agriculture .
Use of fertilizers - The use of chemical fertilizers were given more significance so that there could be fast growth in agricultural production .
Eighth five year plan and agriculture - This five year plan was related to agricultural planning .
There was a provision of spending 22,467 billion rupees in the development of agriculture .
Here 34,425 billion rupees on rural development , 6750 billion rupees on special region program , 35,525 billion rupees on irrigation and flood control program were spent .
Thus 22.2 % share of the expenditure was for agricultural development programs .
The main objective of this scheme was increase in export with self dependence in cereals and diversification of agricultural production .
Ninth five year plan and agriculture - Under this plan the agricultural development program was based on the `` Food security `` policy declared by the government whose prime objective was to double the agricultural development with which India could be freed from `` hunger `` in the next 10 years .
In the ninth five year plan the rate of agricultural development was set 4 . 5 % .
There were suggestions also for the upliftment of marginal and small farmers .
Special emphasis was also laid on infrastructure and irrigation .
Regional programs were run for the development of hilly backward and tribal regions .
Remedies to improve agricultural credit were also told .
Suggestions concerning the export of agricultural development and promoting cooperation in the development of agricultural sectors such as gardening , fisheries , cattle rearing and dairy were also given .
Tenth five year plan and agriculture - During this plan there was a provision of spending 58,933 billion rupees on agriculture and other related areas .
For the development of agriculture under this scheme there will be more public investment in irrigation , seeds , power and streets .
But the economic assistance given on fertilizers , water and power would be lowered .
The canal system would be kept properly .
The minimum support price of food grains and other products would be co-ordinated in such a way that diversification in agriculture and environment related security gets encouragement and Food grains grant is lowered .
The 76 % share of the arable land is with the marginal farmers in our country .
Further the small farmers have very less arable land .
They earn their livelihood only with agriculture .
Agriculture is such a job which is entirely dependent on nature .
Farmer becomes helpless during natural calamities such as flood , drought etc .
Mostly small and marginal farmers are suffering due to the incessant increase in the price of diesel , fertilizers and agricultural equipment and accidental natural calamities but their problems have not changed much from the past few decades .
If we have to increase agricultural production in a right direction then we have to pay special attention on agricultural problems .
The wheat production in our country in the year 2001-02 was 731 million tonnes .
Uttar Pradesh is the first state of the country to have highest wheat production .
Punjab and Haryana come sequentially after it .
Only few states are there in India to have more agricultural production .
Because of the following reasons agricultural production is les .
Majority of the farmers in our country are less educated and they have a traditional perspective towards religion , caste etc . because of which they are afraid of adopting modern techniques .
There are two major problems of agriculture in our country .
The first is that population load on agriculture should be lowered and people should be engaged in some other industries other than farming .
Majority of the farmers in India are poor .
Further because of spending more time in agricultural production , ill-effects of divine outbreaks on agriculture and seasonal employment of agriculture they could not get finance in adequate amount .
The lack of finance affects agriculture and reduces production .
Some institutional causes are also found which are responsible in bringing reduction in agricultural production .
Because of the small land holdings the per hectare production of agriculture is very low .
The size of average land holdings in our country is 1.51 hectare while in other countries such as in Australia it is even less than 188 hectare and 32 % holdings are within 1-4 hectare .
Agricultural production has also reduced because of some major techniques .
It is a truth that a crop could not be grown properly on a land without water .
That is why agricultural production gets affected because of lack of irrigation facilities .
Only 33.3 % share of the arable land in our country is irrigated , the rest 66.7 % share is unirrigated and dependent on monsoons , that is why there is reduction in production .
One major reason behind the low agricultural production in our country is inability to protect the crops from insects and diseases .
16 % share of some cereals gets spoilt by insects every year .
The significant reason of reduction in agricultural production India is that because of the less availability of high quality seeds in our country , our farmers are unable to utilize it properly .
Secondly , because of the orthodox belief of the Indian farmers they make less use of good and useful chemical fertilizers .
Our country is also making less use of chemical fertilizers .
The agricultural production of the country gets lowered also because of natural reasons .
Indian agriculture is dependent on nature especially on rains , rains are uncertain , untimely and uncommon which affects production .
Because of excess rainfall the fertile soil of the farm gets washed away into rivers which reduces the fertility of the land .
Consequently agricultural production gets affected .
There are some defects in Indian soil which reduces its productivity .
Defects like lack of nitrogen , excision of land , water logging and excess wasteland are found in the soil of our country .
There is special significance of irrigation and multipurpose river valley projects in a agriculture dominant country like India .
Agricultural development is only possible in a place which has favorable environment fir it such as soil , climate and rain according to the requirement .
Irrigation is an important factor in agriculture .
Providing water through artificial means is known as irrigation in agriculture .
Rains in India is through monsoon winds .
Amount , timings and place of rains are all uncertain .
Thus agricultural progress on the basis of rains is not possible .
In a country like India where the entire economy is dependent on agriculture .
Irrigation means have special significance at such such places .
Indian central government has formed some major organizations for the development of water means .
National water development council - It was established in July , 1982 .
Its work is to determine the scope of utilization of water by aligning rivers .
So that water reaches the deficit areas from the surplus areas .
National water board - The board established in 1985 is a technological institution for calculating the growth of water means .
The work of this council is to make schemes regarding use of water resources , their conservation and control and to co-ordinate and develop those schemes .
It thinks and gives suggestions to the state governments for flood control , irrigation and shipping .
National Underground water board - This board was established in 1952 but it was reorganized with geological survey of underground water unit of India in 1972 .
The work of this board is to do surveys concerning underground water , determining the possibilities , evaluation and monitoring the quality and method of underground water .
This board prepares the policies , strategies and programs related to the development of underground water in the entire country .
The major means of agriculture in India are canals , the large northern plains are irrigated using canals .
Uttar Pradesh , Punjab and Haryana are major regions where irrigation is done using canals .
There is a network of irrigation using canals in these states .
Apart from them some parts of Bihar , Rajasthan and West Bengal are irrigated using canals .
Some irrigation through canals are also done in delta regions of south India and river valleys .
Our country basically has two kinds of canals .
Flood canals and twelve months canal - The flood canals have water only during rainy season and the twelve months canals have water throughout the year .
The number of twelve months canals is greater in India .
There are following benefits from irrigation through canals .
It takes away the extra water of floods .
Agriculture becomes possible in dry areas .
It is the permanent system of irrigation .
It increases the fertility of soil .
It presents sooner and cheaper rates of irrigation on plains .
Transportation facility could be obtained .
The fear of famine ends .
The following are the harms of irrigation using canals .
Malaria spreads in the canal areas .
Farmers have dispute over canal water .
The nearby areas get flooded when the canals break .
They do not get required and regular water .
Wells have been used for irrigation in India since ancient times and today also it is the popular means of irrigation .
Wells are primarily of two kinds-surface wells or subsurface wells or tube wells .
The following are its benefit .
The wells could be dug at lost cost .
The fertility of the land increases .
Farmer becomes self dependent in water .
The following are its harm .
The wells also dry with famine .
The cost of digging wells is high at the places where water level is low .
Saline water which is mostly found in wells .
It is harmful for crops .
Tube well irrigation is a significant means of agriculture . Water for irrigation is drawn with electricity .
The following are the benefits of irrigation using tube wells .
Farmers labor is saved and they do not need to keep many cattle .
The tube wells act as complementary at the places where there is less amount of canal water .
Well water is more profitable in comparison to canal water because it contains many elements and chemicals which maintain the fertility of soil .
The recurrent operating expenditure is less here .
It will lead to certain and regular irrigation .
It is appropriate for large scale agriculture .
It is a drawback of agricultural irrigation under tube wells is that it requires excessive finance which a poor farmer could not have done .
Many significant organizations concerning agriculture science and technology have been established .
Which is working on an extensive level for the development of agriculture .
Indian council of agricultural research was formed during the tenure of Lord Irwin -LRB- 1926-1931 -RRB- in the chairmanship of Linlithgo in 1926 by royal agriculture commission .
On the recommendations of the council , `` Imperial council of agricultural research `` was established on 23rd May , 1929 for the development of agricultural science and technology .
After independence the council was named `` Indian council of agricultural research `` .
`` Indian council of agricultural research `` is a leading organization in the field of agricultural science & technological development .
Indian council of agricultural research itself does the work of educating and the applications related to agriculture , cattle rearing , fishery and gives assistance and encouragement for it and also maintains a co-ordination between them .
There is comprehensive contribution of agricultural University in the development of agriculture .
Here research and diagnosis related on agricultural problems are done .
Agricultural University and colleges are extremely important from the perspective of agricultural research .
During 1901-05 agricultural colleges were established in Pune , Kanpur , Sabaur , Nagpur , Coimbatore and Lyallpur -LRB- Pakistan -RRB- in India .
Then after there was a series of agricultural colleges .
On the suggestion of joint Indo-American team first agricultural university was established in India in Pantnagar in 1960 .
Then after their number increased .
Now there are a total of 33 state agricultural universities in India and Imphal University is a central agricultural university .
The research work concerning rubber , coffee and tea crops are done by the respective councils .
As a result of green revolution the self dependence that has been achieved in food grains is mainly because of the success in science and technology sector .
Now the farmers of inaccessible areas have also become aware of the benefits of science and technology and new and reformed techniques of agriculture and are also using them .
Agriculture sector has become competent because of the use of modern science and agricultural investments and technology and the dependence of agriculture on monsoons has reduced .
The profound consequences of natural calamities have reduced with the use of new techniques and methods in agricultural works .
There is relatively less amount labor on per unit production because of the impact of science and technology .
It can be said that it has now become possible to have relatively more produce because of equal use of labor .
The other impact of science and technology on agriculture is seen in the form of its capacity to save land .
Any crop or at least more production of few crops could be achieved on a land unit .
This means that now less land is required for a given amount of produce than before .
The third and major impact of science and technology is seen in its capacity to save time .
Now there is a tradition of seeds with relatively less mature duration .
Initially the maturing duration of paddy , wheat , kidney bean , millet , sorghum crops was more because of which it was difficult to take other crops in these farms .
There is a positive impact on agricultural production and productivity and the element of risk has reduced .
There has been inclusion of new agricultural investments and change in crop structure .
Soil is the gift of nature in which significant properties are present .
The crop gets affected by the nitrogen , phosphorous and potash and soluble salts .
The element which lacks in soil .
The level of production can be increased with its extra supply .
Soil test is a significant means in intelligent balanced and skillful use of fertilizers and take adequate benefits from them .
Science and technology has a significant contribution in that regard therefore soil test is a integral element of any scheme of agricultural development .
There are 454 soil testing laboratories in the country out of which 106 are running laboratories .
In India 454 soil testing research institutions have been established at various regions out of which 106 are running research institutions .
Currently science and technology has become an empowered medium of testing ground water source .
This work can be easily done with its use .
The technology of detecting underground water by seeing the figures and pictures sent by satellites has been developed .
The space department have prepared the water science map of the entire country with the help of pictures given by satellites .
Beneficiary and immunity `` Genes `` could be supplied to the plants with the help of bio-technology .
The plants can be made capable to grow in saline , famine and other severe conditions with the entry of beneficial `` genes `` .
The structure of genes could be desirable changed through genetic engineering in biotechnology .
Apart from agricultural development they greatly contribute in cattle development .
India has the highest number of cows and buffaloes in the world but their production is very low .
The breed reform work that been undertaken so far .
That has developed great scope of breed reform with exotic species of cattle .
Biotechnology has presented good results in the direction of fetal changes .
It will help is developing the cattle according to the developed countries of the world .
For increasing the production of pulses and coarse grain crops now it is essential to use the scientific research and technology .
Thus the seeds should be developed according to the conditions of various places .
Efforts should also be made to make the dry lands capable of agriculture .
The scientific methods that conserve resources and agricultural inputs should be developed for agricultural development now .
With this more production could be achieved through less agricultural inputs .
There has been undisputed reform in agriculture with the capable use of science and technology .
But one should also pay attention to its negative points .
The inclusion of women in modern technological agricultural works is reducing .
Various agricultural works which were done by the men and women initially are today being done using various kinds of agricultural equippments .
Because of which the men and women laborers are suffering and their work opportunities are getting finished .
The increasing use of various insecticides is also leading to harmful impact .
Some fraction of these insecticides gets absorbed in grains .
It is adversely affecting the human health .
In the contemporary scenario majority of the rural population and families engaged in farming have stood up with cooperation movement .
The co-operative movement has propagated in roughly every village of Gujarat , Maharashtra , Kerala and Tamilnadu .
Though co-operative committees , debts are provided not only for agricultural development but it also provides many other facilities .
The co-operative movement could be made successful by paying attention to below mentioned suggestions .
along with the building and growth of personal funds , management should be emphasized .
Rather than emphasizing on increasing the number of co-operative committees , it is essential to pay attention to the quality aspect of the committees .
Extensive programs on co-operative education and training should be run .
Honest , intellect and hard working leadership should be prepared by getting rid off the feeling of personal interest .
The principles of co-operation should be obeyed strictly and consciously .
Women should be made interested towards movement so that they also fully contribute in the development of co-operation .
Agricultural credit should be primarily given for production and some debt should also be given for unproductive works .
In order to reduce the complexity of co-operation laws there is great need to reevaluate them .
The co-operation movement should be freed from government intervention .
There should be proper planning for the development of co-operation movement .
The situation of dis-balance of co-operation development and works in various states should be removed .
the movement should be expanded to rural and tribal regions .
The government organizations should be cooperative with co-operative marketing , consumer committees , export and import trade organizations .
The National and regional governments from time to time have undertaken steps to gather information regarding the defects of agricultural marketing and their prevention .
For the first time the major suggestions given by the royal agricultural commission in 1928 for the reform of marketing system are as follow .
Appointment of trained and skilled marketing officers .
Surveying various agricultural products .
Establishing regulated markets .
To get rid off the agricultural marketing restrictions the farmers should first organize their co-operative marketing committees .
The committees save the farmers from the exploitation of traders , reduces the monopoly of mediators and increase the power of farmer ` s bargaining .
They provide the aggregation , storage transportation and grading facility of agricultural products .
Marketing and inspection directorate was established in 1935 by the Indian administration .
The royal agricultural commission -LRB- 1928 -RRB- and the Central Banking investigation committee had recommended for the establishment of this directorate .
Since July , 1958 the office of the directorate has been transferred from Nagpur to Faridabad .
Currently it is functioning as marketing and investigation directorate under ministry of rural reconstruction .
Developing transportation facilities on the basis of agricultural productions is very essential in India so that produced goods are imported and exported at low cost .
Then only it will be possible to reduce agricultural marketing expenditure .
The second thing to be noted is that the speed of the construction of streets joining villages and cities being used in every season should be increased .
Further adequate number of light weight bullock carts with rubber Tyre and diesel and petrol run trucks also seems essential .
The significance of bullock carts in the age of science has not reduced .
Majority of the agricultural marketing depends on bullock carts .
In the second five year plan an all India market service has been arranged to provide information regarding the price changes of agricultural products .
The market rates of agricultural products were broadcast everyday on the radio .
Market reviews were published in the daily , weekly and monthly journals .
For this radio and television has been arranged in gram panchayats .
The everyday various market figures are collected and they are published .
The condition of Indian agricultural laborers is very deplorable .
Because of very less wages the lifestyle of these laborers is very low .
These people arrange their two square meal by working in the fields from morning till night .
They face various kinds of problems .
Agricultural labor spends his life in dirt and mud .
He works with hungry stomach and he is not even aware of relief in storm and sun .
He grows rice for us but he himself remains hungry .
He feeds our milking cows but he doesn ` t get anythings except pound and water .
He fills our granaries with grains but every day round the year asks for ration .
He persistently cuts wood and fills water for them .
Who have become rich because of his hard work .
His condition is shocking and lamentable story .
There is scarcity of associate domestic industrial affairs in villages .
If the crop gets destroyed because of flood , famine etc . then it becomes difficult for the farmers to survive .
Majority of the farmers in India belong to the poor class .
That is why their social status always remains low .
During the planning period there was extensive development of technology in agricultural sector . Because of the increased use of machines in agriculture unemployment among uneducated agricultural laborers is increasing which is a serious problem for them .
Housing problem - The landless laborers do not have their own houses .
They take the permission of the land owners and built huts on their useless land and stays .
As a return they have to be forced laborers at the land owner ` s place .
Physical , social , moral and religious dignities end when several persons stay under the same hut .
Lack of organization - There is no specific organization of Indian agricultural laborers .
that is why that are unable to make any deals with their land owners regarding their wages .
Seasonal employment - The agricultural laborers do not get work throughout the year .
according to the second agricultural investigation committee a temporary male labor gets an average of 197 days work annually out of which for 40 days he works for himself and the rest 128 days he remains unemployed . Thus in a year children get 204 days and women get 141 days work respectively .
Thus the average of his annual income remains low .
Lowest level of wages - The wage level of Indian laborers is very less than the industrial laborers .
There are two reasons behind it : Increase in the number of landless laborers and lack of non agricultural jobs in rural areas .
Low wages leave a bad impact on the health and working capacity of the laborers .
Indebtedness - The pressure of debt keeps increasing on the laborer as the income is not according to his needs .
Because of the indebtedness he hesitates in dealing with the land owners for wages .
Despite working for the entire life for the land owner ` s , the labor doesn ` t get freed from the debt .
Exploitation of child labor and women labor - The children and wives of laborers are compelled to work to fulfill their needs .
The women and child laborers are given less wages after making them work for extra hours .
Thus the exploitation of child and woman laborers is the major problem of agricultural sector .
The following suggestions are given to improve the economic and social condition of agricultural laborers .
Establishment of co-operative committees - Co-operative committees should be set up for landless laborers and and they should work in such a manner so that laborers get jobs . For example milk industry , honeybee hatching industry .
All these can improve their economic condition .
Minimum wages - Minimum wages should be set for all states to increase the income of agricultural laborers . By passing the minimum wages act in 1984 the central government has taken many steps to raise agricultural laborers .
Minimum wages has been fixed .
Arrangement of co-operation - Planning commission has recommended that low cost , airy dwelling house should be built for the agricultural laborers where they work .
Advancement in agricultural art - High quality seeds and manures should be arranged , there should be an expansion of irrigation means , means of transportation should be developed , the useless and barren land should be made arable .
There should be improvement in selling of produce , the farms should be consolidated and the farms should be made able for economic tillage , animal wealth should be reformed and the farmers should be provided capital at low rate of interest .
Development of small and cottage industry - There is need to redevelop the extincting cottage industries of our country .
It will employ many unemployed people .
Establishment of employment offices in villages - The employment offices which we have now are in cities .
Only educated people are getting benefits from it .
They can be prove to be helpful in fetching jobs for the laborers if such offices are set in villages also .
Therefore it should be noted .
Various kinds of efforts were made after independence by the Indian administration to improve the condition of laborers which as as follows .
Distribution of land - The government has emphasized the effort that whatever land will be available as a result of of land reform such as highest limit of farm which means the useless and barren land will be made arable , will be distributed among the agricultural laborers .
So far they have received 69 million hectare barren land .
5.6 million hectare land received as a result of highest limit of land has been distributed among the agricultural laborers only .
Abolition of slavery - The Indian constitution has done the abolition of the slavery of agricultural laborers .
Assistance is being provided to improve the condition of agricultural laborers and to help them lead an independent life .
In 1976 bonded labor system act was passed .
With which India became free from the problem of bonded labor .
Land donation movement - Acharya Vinova bhave started the land donation movement for the landless agricultural laborers in 1951 .
The purpose of this movement was to take lands from the land owners as per their wish and distribute it to the agricultural laborers .
As a result of this movement roughly 68 million acre land was collected out of which 15 million acre land was distributed among landless farmers .
Rural industrialization - rural industrialization was also given prior importance in the schemes .
It is also essential in the current scenario .
Assistance is given in the villages for the establishment of cottage industries .
Rural industrial settlements have been build in many development boards .
As a result the agricultural laborers get more opportunities of employment and the dependence of farming reduces .
Basic credential committees were just fulfilling 3 % share of the total rural credit in 1954 . Then after the share of co-operative committees in rural credit increased to 25 % till 1969 and till 1985 it became 40 % .
It is clear that still the money lenders have great belief in rural credit system .
The reason for majority of the drawbacks of primary agricultural credit committees are .
The management board of unskilled management committee do not have the knowledge of co-operative principles .
The exploiter section grows when there is no check on the lordship of hidden interest and sets its impact .
The inspection and auditing work of the committees are not adequate and satisfying .
The farmers of weaker section are mostly neglected .
The feeling of co-operation and saving has not developed in the members of the committee .
The debts are less used in productive works which is the ill-effect of not keeping eye on the debts .
There is lack of co-ordination among the credit organizations .
The doubt of competition among the government institutions and commercial banks is increasing while it is utmost essential to keep a co-ordination between both the institutions .
The development of committees in various states have been uneven .
The extension loans are inadequate .
Looking at the needs of the debts the debt amount is even less than the minimum credit needs .
Thus the dependence of farmers on exploiting money lenders still exists .
The debt policy adopted by most of the committees is contaminated .
The committees have neither adopted crop debt system nor have they made the debt policy liberal and practical .
The tradition of lending debt on the gage of land is deeply rooted .
There is unnecessary delay in debt distribution .
There is lack of co-ordination between agricultural credit and marketing practices .
The central and state co-operative banks should be quickly reformed and the weak committees should be stopped .
The committees should emphasize on quickening deposits .
The debt system should be reformed .
There should be a system of recovering debt in the form of produce and crop system should be adopted .
The debts should be used in productive works and they should be checked .
The personal treasures of co-operative committees should be strengthened .
The credit should be associated to production and marketing works .
The volunteer management board of the committees should be properly educated and trained .
Mutual co-ordination should be set between co-operative credit committees and commercial banks .
The sharp need of adequate growth in secured treasure should be emphasized .
These committees should be developed in the form of rural banks from time to time so that they provide various kinds of banking services to both agriculturists and non-agriculturists .
Serious efforts are required to reduce cross term debts .
For this , the system of associating production debts and credit with marketing and recovering debts in the form of product can be effective .
At any cost the moneylenders and other elements with vested interests should not be made the members of committees and the intelligent leaders should be given opportunities .
The farmers members of smaller and weaker sections should be encouraged so that they are service in a better way .
The farmers should be provided with new and best kind of instruments , the consumer goods should be supplied regularly at cheap rates .
The debt system should be simple , useful and workable in less time .
In October , 1985 a meeting was held in the chairmanship of central agriculture minister in order to discuss the problems of co-operative institutions and agricultural debts .
Here discussions were held on various programs and providing debt for weaker sections and debt related crimes in co-operative institutions .
The important resolutions consisted of strengthening primary agricultural debt committees , strict action against those who intentionally do not return the debts and computerization of figures in co-operative institutions .
The basic objective of crop debt system is to use agricultural credit for production works . The three things that should be noted to fulfill this objective are :1 . The credit committees should properly check the use of credit , 2 . the debts will be provided on the basis of crop system only after evaluating the capacity of debt recovery and ,3 . attempts will be made to recover the debts on due dates .
This new program was prepared and presented in 1964 by the food & agricultural society and co-operative ministry .
On the suggestion of reserve bank of India the same year , it was sent to the state governments .
For the fulfillment of the objective it was directed that the debts will be provided evaluating their production needs in the form of cash or check .
The major characteristics of crop debt method or system can be clarified through the lines given below .
Production needs and product use are emphasized for short term credit .
That is the farmers are given debt according to the debt or ability of complex crop or capacity .
Not on the backing of their property .
The supply of good and new agricultural inputs are made regular and fixed .
The agricultural credit is connected to marketing .
The farmer is made to commit in written that he will sell his crop only through directed marketing committee and he accepts the debt amount of selling price .
Majority of the debts are given in the form of agricultural inputs .
Debts are provided before sowing the seeds and they are recovered on the harvesting .
Following problems erupt while running the crop debt method .
The arrangement of common credit distribution was not done in accordance to the production of every member .
The members took a much more debt beyond their capacity to repay because the maximum standard became minimum .
The determination of commercial standards can not be done differently for different crops .
The farmers are more interested in cash debts , they are less fond of taking debts in the form of agricultural inputs .
The repayment of debts generally can not be done by selling produce .
