Three notable children ` s films were made in 1954 - ` Munna ` , ` Jagruti ` , and ` Boot Polish ` .
Among these `` Munna `` did not receive any particular success but `` Jagruti `` and `` Boot Polish `` became successful.
The second successful children ` s film which came that same year was `` Jagruti `` .
Many songs of this film of the famous director Satyen Bose have become like national songs.
It was said that with the right education the most spoilt children can also be brought on the correct path.
In 1954 itself another children ` s film ` Boot Polish ` was screened.
Like ` Jagruti ` this film also was extremely successful.
The message of fighting with the bitter truths of life and making one ` s own path has been given in this.
It was said that no work is small or big.
Baby Naaz received the honour of best child artist for this film.
This is the most memorable film of David Abraham in the role of John Chacha.
He received the Filmfare award of Best Supporting Actor for this role.
As a consequence of inspiring screenplay, skilled performance and melodious songs this film gained unlimited success.
Almost all the child artists of that time had acted in the film ` Hum Panchi Ek Dal Ke ` screened in 1957.
In 1967 the Satyen Bose directed film ` Masoom ` was a successful children ` s film.
Screenwriter Ruby Sen received the Filmfare award of Best Screenplay for this film.
That same year the film ` Phool aur Kaliyan ` in the direction of Ram Gabale was produced under the banner of Rajkamal.
Shivram had given music in this film and Ramesh, Hemant, Nitin and Dattaram had played the main roles.
That same year Raj Kapoor released the film ` Ab Dilli Dur Nahi ` as the director.
This film is the story of the journey of a boy in search of justice.
In 1961 Bimal Roy made the film ` Kabuliwala ` in the direction of Hemen Gupta based on the story by Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore.
The unforgettable performance of Balraj Sahni in the title role and the music of Salil Choudhury made this film memorable.
That same year another film of the Children ` s Film Society ` Savitri ` in the direction of Phani Majumdar was screened.
The film ` Son of India ` made in the next year 1962 - was the last film of Mehboob Khan.
`` Nanha munna rahi hu , Desh ka sipahi hu , bolo mere sang Jai Hind `` is the most popular song of the film.
` Dosti ` became a superhit and it received five Filmfare awards including Best Film.
In this the friendship and sacrifice of a blind and a lame boy has been shown.
Majrooh Sultanpuri, Laxmikant Pyarelal and Mohammad Rafi - all three received a Filmfare award for the song - Chahunga main tujhe sanjh savere .
Three years after ` Dosti ` in 1968 the film ` Do Kaliyan ` was screened.
Neetu Singh had played a dual role as a child artist in this.
One film, which cannot be called a children ` s film but became quite popular among children .
That was - ` Hathi mere Sathi ` released in 1971 .
A very beautiful portrayal of the faithfulness of animals and the humane relationships between man and animal was done in this film .
Unable to translate
The harmonious relationships between man and nature has been shown in this .
In 1985 Hindi Sangeetalya made the film ` Aazadi ki Or ` in the direction of P . S . Prakash .
Through the medium of this interesting story the cruelty of man and the exploitation of animals by him for his interest has been shown in this .
In 1992 Gopi Desai directed the film ` Mujhse Dosti Karoge ` for National Center of Films for Children and Young People .
In this the brave exploits of the world of dreams of a child has been portrayed .
In 1998 Children ` s Film Society produced the film ` Goal ` made in the direction of Gulbahar Singh .
It was shown in this film how the instructor of a small city improves the talent of a child of a deprived area without any discrimination .
The film ` Chota Chetan ` released this same year was the first 3D film of India .
In 2001 another film of Children ` s Film Society ` Baaja ` was released, whose direction was done by A . K . Bir .
The film portrays the development of the mental growth of a boy .
In 2002 Vishal Bharadwaj ` s film ` Makdi ` was released .
In the film Shabana Azmi, Shweta Prasad and Makarand Deshpande were in the main roles .
The story of a girl and an alleged witch living in the mansion has been shown in this .
In 2004 under the banner of Children ` s Film Society the Sankalp Meshram directed film ` Chutkan ki Mahabharat ` was released .
The story of such a boy has been shown in this film , whose dreams suddenly start becoming reality .
In 2005 under the production of UTV Motion Pictures the film ` Blue Umbrella ` directed by Vishal Bharadwaj came on the cinema screens .
The story presenting selfless and sensitive values in this film has been presented in a very poetic manner .
Pankaj Kapoor played the lead role in this film .
The children ` s film ` Taare Zameen Par ` released in 2007 was the first film of Amir Khan as director .
Darsheel Safary in the role of a neglected slow minded child was awarded with the critics award for natural acting .
I was very young , Papa had brought a new T.V. at our house .
Watching every programme had become part of habit .
In this regard I began watching regional films with English subtitles on Sundays .
I could not understand the dialogues of the film and neither could I understand the English subtitles much .
The peace and story of that film touched the heart .
After that watching regional movies every Sunday became part of habit .
At the same time I realized the richness of regional films .
This had the advantage that I had a good opportunity to understand the country ` s culture , way of life .
Regional cinema has an active role in Indian cinema .
Each year 1000 films are produced in regional languages​​ .
In this the films of the south have an important role .
Telugu film industry is at second place in India and Tamil at third place .
Often films of Bollywood are made on being inspired by regional films .
` Balika Vadhu ` was first made in Bangla and Moushumi Chatterjee was there in it , which later was made in Hindi .
` Sadma ` also was initially made in Tamil .
The history of regional cinema is older than Bollywood .
In 1909 Raghupathi Venkataratnam Naidu was a founder and actor in Indian films .
His films were silent .
So they could not be limited to any language .
He would go places himself for the ` promotion ` of films .
The ` Venkaiah Naidu ` award is given in his honour at the yearly Nandi awards ceremony .
Now the place of Telugu film industry is at second place in India and every year approximately 245 films are made in it .
The third largest film industry of India is of the Tamil language .
Actor Rajnikant receives the most money in Asia .
Kamal Hassan of the Tamil film industry has received the most national awards - received three Best Actor , one Best Child Artist and one for Best Film .
Many films of Tamil language have been sent to the Oscars .
Ilaiyaraaja received an Academy Award twice in music direction and A.R. Rahman is an eminent music director for all Indians who won Oscars .
Malayali film industry is also quite a big industry in India .
Malayali cinema is of less budget but remains flourishing technically .
A. Vincent , Adoor Gopalakrishnan , Govindam , John Abraham are some well known names in Malayali films .
Till 1947 the production of Malayali films were done by Tamil producers mostly .
The place of regional films in India is very important .
In this country of various tongues and languages regional films are also as popular as Hindi films .
In the history of Indian cinema the contribution of Baburao Painter too cannot be forgotten .
Like Phalke he was a serious , creative and exploratory filmmaker .
In the era of silent films there has been a notable contribution of ` Kohinoor Films ` .
Under the banner of this company 98 feature films were produced .
` Vikram Urvashi ` ( 1920 ) and ` Sati Anusuya ` ( 1921 ) were his famous films .
The first talkie of the world ` The Jazz Singer ` was made in 1927 which was produced by Warner Brothers .
There were three songs in this film and this film did very well .
Because of the production of talkies abroad there was a rush to make films in India too among whom Ardeshir M. Irani and Jamshedji Madan are prominent .
Prabhat Film Company and Bombay Talkies produced many important films from a social and historical viewpoint .
The first talkie presented by Prabhat films was ` Ayodhya ka Raja ` ( 1932 ) which was released in Hindi and Marathi together .
The year 1933 was a historic year of Hindi cinema , when V. Shantaram produced the first colour film ` Sairandhri ` under the banner of Prabhat Film Company .
The technical work of colouring this film was done in Germany .
The film became successful and after this the relocation of the company was done to Pune from Kohlapur .
After ` Dharmatma ` V. Shantaram directed social films like ` Duniya na maane ` in 1937 and ` Aadmi ` in 1939 under the banner of Prabhat .
He created his company ` Rajkamal Kala Mandir ` as well as the first film produced by himself ` Shakuntala ` .
This film became quite famous and was continuously shown for one hundred and four weeks in ` Swastik Cinema ` of Mumbai .
The establishment of Bombay Talkies was done by famous actor and director Himanshu Rai .
In 1950 another famous film of Bombay Talkies ` Mahal ` came .
In this film the thriller of the doubt of rebirth was inserted .
The songs of this film are remembered even today .
Its lyricist was Khemchand Prakash and the narrative, dialogue and direction of the film had been done by Kamal Amrohi .
There were some such filmmakers apart from this talkies , without whose mention the history of Indian cinema is incomplete, among whim Sohrab Modi and Mehboob Khan ( 1906 - 1964 ) are prominently noteworthy .
These two created trend setter films , in which ` Pukar ` (1939 ) of Sohrab Modi and ` Mother India ` of Mehboob Khan are noteworthy .
After Independence the foundation of disharmony came between each other which was a big danger for the nationality and culture of the country .
Therefore to generate national Unity and communal harmony cinema played an important role .
The music for all the films of Mehboob Khan who has directed more than twenty four films has been given by Naushad .
Mehboob Khan ` s ` Aan ` ( 1952 ) which remained quite popular abroad and because of songs and costume this film was a popular film at that time .
Actually , this was the remake of the film ` Aurat ` made in 1940 by him .
In this film the award for Best Actress was presented , which was a ` golden chapter ` in the history of Hindi cinema .
Bimal Roy ` s films in the realistic tradition of rural background are still a precedent.
Through his characters he not only presented the social reality in his every film , but made one aware of a sense of social responsibility .
After ` Do Bigha Zameen ` Bimal Roy directed three films together in 1954 , in which ` Baap - Beti ` , ` Viraj Bahu ` and ` Naukri ` are prominent .
For the film ` Viraj Bahu ` created on the novels of Sarat Chandra the Filmfare award for Best Actress was given to Kamini Kaushal .
Hereafter Bimal Roy made many other films too with Dilip Kumar , in which ` Devdas ` , ` Madhumati ` and ` Yahudi ` are prominent .
On acquiring acting skills through inheritance Raj Kapoor gave a new dimension to reality and romancing through the medium of motion pictures and established modernity in Hindi cinema .
Under the banner of his R. K. studio founded in 1948 he made the first film ` Aag ` in 1948.
The use of the flashback technique was done for the first time in this film .
His film ` Shahar Aur Sapna ` made in 1936 presents the bitter truth on the housing problem of Bombay Metropolis .
Raj Khosla who started his career with ` Navketan ` made the film ` Kala Pani ` in 1958 with Dev Anand, which was based on a crime thriller.
Dev Anand gave a memorable performance in this film and he received the honour of Best Actor.
This film based on a crime thriller was a blockbuster film at the box office.
Sohrab Modi became such a filmmaker in this age who created historical costume films.
He made the film ` Jhansi ki Rani ` in 1953, which is considered the first technicolor film of India.
While talking about Hindi cinema if the trinities -Dilip Kumar, Raj Kapoor and Dev Anand are forgotten then it will be unjust.
Famous by the name of ` tragedy king ` or ` Devdas ` the real name of Dilip Kumar was Yusuf Khan.
In the forties decade Dilip Kumar, Raj Kapoor and Dev Anand are prominent among the three artists who got their name written in golden letters in the history of cinema.
Starting his film career with ` Hum Ek Hain ` (1946) Dev Anand got his first break with ` Ziddi ` (1948), in which his heroine was Kamini Kaushal.
The film became a superhit and Dev Anand became an evergreen hero.
After this many films of his like ` Vidya ` , ` Jeet ` , ` Sanam ` , ` Nadaan ` , and ` Nirmala ` came with Suraiya and Madhubala.
Chetan Anand was Dev Anand ` s elder brother.
For helping him Dev Anand established the independent film company ` Navketan ` in which he retained the status of director.
In 1962 he made a film ` Haqeeqat ` on the background of the war of India - China which was quite popular and discussed.
The brother of the evergreen actor Dev Anand Vijay Anand made a popular film like ` Guide ` for the first time with Indo-American help.
` Guide ` is one of the memorable films of the golden age.
This film made Dev Anand an evergreen actor.
There is an important contribution of Baldev Raj Chopra and Yash Chopra also in the history of cinema.
B.R.Chopra made a trend setter film like ` Sholay ` (1953).
The background of his films was dependent on socio-economic as well as national unity and communal harmony.
He is considered such a director of Bollywood, who gave a new perspective and presented a new dimension to Indian cinema.
He has always picked up a new issue through the medium of each of his films.
For this reason he was honoured with the ` Dada Saheb Phalke award ` of 2001 for his unparalleled contribution in Indian cinema.
We love each other.
Our families also tolerate each other.
I make buildings, you are an interior designer.
It seems like yesterday that my daughter Natasha was born and today is her engagement.
Son Kabir! I have not lost a daughter, I have gained a son.
All you people are heartily welcomed to our family.
Kabir is one of the best people in this world.
You just hold his hand, walk with him because whatever happens he will not break your heart.
I have heard something about your bachelor party.
It was my bachelor party buddy , else I would never have done this.
This was one thing we had decided that we would do together.
If you cannot come I am cancelling this trip.
I am not getting senti, alright.
Once before also it has been cancelled then once again is fine.
I know why you do not want to come but now it has been four years since that thing.
Even today I have only two friends.
Imraan! What we had talked about , did you think about it?
Are you coming back to Mumbai or not?
And that you are going to Spain, is it a coincidence or had to made a programme?
Why don ` t you say clearly what you have to say?
Alright, you have an intention of meeting Salman?
Has he ever tried to contact you? Ever asked how you are? Ever called you once?
It is possible he did and you did not tell me.
Till yesterday I did not know even this that he was my father.
Alright, you do what you want to but remember one thing please, only Faisal was your father.
I am only going for three weeks, Natasha.
What will I do in London alone?
You will shop then after three weeks I will come there and life your shopping bags.
Buddy I cannot believe that the three of us are together.
First we will go to Costa Brava which is my choice, then Arjun wants to go to Seville and from there we will go to Pamplona which is your choice.
Tomorrow morning will leave for Costa Brava.
How much further is this gallery of yours buddy?
Salman Habib! Name is indigenous, would be Pakistani or Indian?
Don ` t know where we have reached while searching for his galleries.
Kabira! First see this amazing view and then see this poor friend of ours.
I say that he has become mentally sick.
Four years earlier we had had to cancel this trip because of her buddy.
Today we are here because of me.
Hey! What is your name?
Imran, but friends call me Majnu.
Arjun! It is the duty of man to try, success-failure is all in His hands.
You had said that I will buy a phone for you, you had not specified which phone.
Oho! Now please stop it yaar you two.
Anyway, now listen, what have we come to Costa Brava to do?
Laila! What are you doing here?
Buddy I am not getting married to her for wealth.
Will you be able to get married for money?
I want that life keeps surprising me, keeps inspiring me, find new people.
I want that you get a drink for me.
You life is about to change.
Kabir has said a lot about you.
Very cool, what is she doing in your room?
Imran has invited her to dinner, for celebrating our first life.
I am telling the truth.
Natasha why are you getting upset?
I am not upset, it is getting late for the flight.
It felt like today I am at the most peaceful place of the world friend.
Man is aware of his each breath, each moment.
Just imagine, if we could live our whole life like this.
So, is the fear of water still there?
Now there is no fear, not even of living.
Oho! All of life ` s secrets were revealed in one dive only.
Laila! Finally we are able to see our old friend and so that he does not relapse why don ` t you come with us on the rest of the trip?
Actually you guys should come.
No, tomorrow we are going to Seville.
Look, Seville was Arjun ` s choice, he has already done the booking.
And to play with the booking of Arjun is equal to giving an invitation to death.
Do not confuse your work with your life.
Your work is not your life, just a part of it like this relationship is a part of your life.
That is why I bought this apartment so that we could live together.
I am thinking about our future.
Future will come tomorrow Arjun! Where is our today?
What do you want from me?
You had promised that this time come what may we will go to Italy.
And without asking me you cancelled the ticket.
Yaar who knows I get this time with you both or not, thought whatever we have to do we should do it this time itself.
Laila! Your friend is quite cute.
Well! You forgot me so soon?
Laila! It will be written on the pages of history that my first love was you.
I thought you will be happy on seeing me.
Natasha! This is my bachelor trip and you know that I want to spend this time with my friends.
Really, Laila is your friend?
She is our driving instructor yaar, I had told you over the phone too.
Natasha! I met her only today.
This is why you have come here?
Dinner plan is being made, would you two want to come?
There is no need to go.
I too love you a lot.
Why? What happened if she came?
Laila! Your finance cannot come to your bachelor party.
Natasha hates you.
Yes, she said - Laila is your friend?
Laila! You live here in Spain?
After this holiday Kabir and I will be there.
In my opinion you three must come to Seville with us.
I am going back to London tomorrow.
So you had come for only one day?
I don ` t want to disturb your plan.
What kind of things are you saying Natasha, you disturbance?
Kabir was saying that you two have met with such difficulty?
But please you have to come for the wedding.
Imran please! Because of one man like you the name of all Indians is tarnished.
Why don ` t you both go for a long walk?
The boys whom I liked wanted something from life , I something else.
By the way what kind of boys do you like?
Like I know that the guy who gets only three weeks holiday in a year cannot be your type.
He cannot be anybody ` s type, where does he have the time?
And he who thinks about his career, not even him.
And he who thinks money to be the most important thing in his life?
You don ` t know anything about me.
Does earning money give you a lot of happiness?
I was eight years old when my dad passed away, leaving only a huge debt for my mother.
I understood very fast that this world runs on money and only money.
But you didn ` t give an answer to my question.
Yes, I get happiness from money.
Then why did you cry that day?
If even today you feel an absence of something then what is that?
Take out time for those things from which you get actual happiness.
Wow! Someone should learn from you how to live.
Its as if my life is passing inside a closed box.
A person should only be in a box when he is dead.
Natasha stay for another few days.
I am not likig seeing you in a sad mood.
How would you feel if I went somewhere alone with my friends without you?
You have your own life and and if tomorrow you and Samira want to take a trip somewhere why would I stop you?
And if I tell you over the phone that we have met some boys and have made plans for dinner with them then?
I have trust in you.
If you want to stay then stay and if you don ` t want to stay then I will leave you at the airport tomorrow.
Good luck, for the upcoming adventure.
And if you going to go to Singapore for your new project then I will also go with you.
But, that hotel is your dream project Natasha.
How did I know then that I am going to get married.
Do not worry buddy, we will reach.
Listen, what is your feeling about these two?
His behaviour fails in front of Natasha.
If a friend will not understand the problem of a friend then who will understand?
Again he is sitting hiding his face behind the same diary, boring us.
Man! What do you keep writing in that?
You are definitely going through some emotional problem.
I always say that if a friend does not understand the problem of a friend then who will understand?
I will say one word, hearing that whatever comes to your mind first you have to say, without thinking.
Aha! So according to my test result your emotional problem is your father and you are hiding this from everybody.
And according to my opinion, Doctor Sigmund Fraud! you should tear and throw away your degree.
Yes buddy, she was very happy on meeting you too.
Kabir! You are happy right?
Why? Why are you asking like this?
Are you happy with Natasha?
Dude, you have met her the first time.
She thought that there is something between Laila and me.
There is an artist of the name Salman, he lives here.
That lady was saying, in the gallery, that he sells his painting from the house itself.
In any case I am totally fed up with the company of you two.
Then come I ` ll show you people what plans I have made for us three?
You made this plan intentionally right? You know that I feel scared of doing this.
Just imagine, we have to come flying towards the ground after jumping from a height of fifteen thousand feet.
That is called falling, not flying.
Ultimately he also felt nice in the water.
And you were going to cancel this holiday.
This holiday was written in our fate.
This moment, our being here, everything is written.
If someone does not bail us, then we will keep rotting here till this case goes to court.
Arjun! Tell him that I have to make a call.
Well why will bail us?
Sir, my name is Imran.
I am the son of Rahila.
He used to love you very much Imran.
Whether it is Sports Day or Parents Day, whether our fathers came or not, Abbu would always come.
Do you always appear with such manners?
So what are you guys doing in Seville?
Meaning after jumping from the plane you landed straight in jail?
But, apart from that what work do you do?
My family has a construction business.
Oho! It doesn ` t matter, anybody can make a mistake.
What you write in advertising is for others, like I have made this painting for others, do you write anything for yourself?
I thought many times about you that sometime, somewhere there will be a meeting with you.
But this I could not understand ever that when I will meet you what should I say?
What is truth?
Everyone has his own value of truth.
Look, I was twenty five years old.
Rahila was probably a couple of years younger than me.
My dreams were different, I wanted to be an artist.
I came to know about you last year.
But you knew since ages that I was there, but you never wanted to meet me.
I thought this is better.
You had only said that you wanted to hear the truth right?
Can I do anything for you?
I can ` t say right now Natasha, will say when I meet.
Why are you asking the same question again and again?
You know, before this holiday everything was alright between us.
Kabir are you serious about this relationship or not?
I thought this should be the last experience of our trip, this could be the last experience of our life.
Agreed that this is not as safe as the rest of the sports, its illegal too in many countries.
If you want to erase the fear hiding inside yourself then here is our greatest fear death.
Because there is victory beyond fear.
I will stand tomorrow morning at seven ` o clock at the starting line, whether you come or not.
I hope you didn ` t propose this marriage a little too soon?
Actually I hadn ` t even proposed.
On Mom ` s birthday I had bought a ring for her.
I had shown the ring to Natasha before giving it and she thought that it is for her.
So this is why this vacation is so important for you.
Basically, you had to hear from someone else that you should not go ahead with this marriage and who would say this to you apart from both of us?
But ask yourself that whether you want to go ahead with this marriage one hundred percent?
But I have already committed buddy.
Its not so easy Imran, our parents have become involved.
Why are you thinking about dying buddy, think this that if you remain alive then what will you do?
If I stayed alive then I will show you both my poetry.
If I remain alive then I will go to London and tell Natasha that I am sorry, but I cannot go through with this marriage.
In my opinion there must be some disarray in the car.
In my opinion, someone amongst us has got up in the morning and seen the face of a girl.
You were coming down from upstairs, I had only seen your face.
She is looking at a girl which is why the car is not starting.
Till the time she keeps seeing towards this the car is not going to start, she should be chased off.
Hey, you gave a holiday to Mauja.
But who will stay here at night?
See brother! You give him a holiday one day and I will stay, simple.
Once sleep comes at night then it breaks with great difficulty.
If some customer returns after coming back then don ` t tell me anything.
See ma ` am light has gone, now you go too!
Come tomorrow to report.
Please open the door, I am in great trouble.
My car has broken down.
Please open the door, I am a girl, you should help me.
It will take some time to repair the car you sit somewhere.
See my coat is lying there wear it.
Wow! The car is also behaving like a wet cat like ma ` am.
See, there is a flask kept there, pick it up and bring it here.
Pick it up and bring it yourself, I am not your servant.
I am also not the servant of anybody.
When the flask will come only then will the work get done.
Take, its hot tea drink it up quick.
You are shivering from the cold, but the mind has still not cooled.
Pardon the trouble madam you had to sit for quite some time.
I haven ` t seen a man as strange as you ever.
The thing actually is this, people think me to be a little mad!
You mad, you will make a good sensible person mad too.
It is nine o ` clock why haven ` t you gone home and slept?
Lat night a girl had come.
I am waiting for her.
What is he doing?
Which girl are you waiting for?
She had come to get her car repaired.
But why are you waiting for the girl?
She left without giving the money.
She has kept this bag and gone, will definitely come back.
How do I open the bag without asking the girl?
There is not even a paisa in this.
You return this bag of cartridges to her and ask for five rupees and twelve annas.
That is alright brother, but this question now arises that I haven ` t seen the girl so why should I go?
It is his fault, he should go.
Ok Shiela now I ` ll leave, its become quite late.
If the car stops again like yesterday then trouble will come.
Pray that the car does not stop on the way.
Here take your bag, oblige me and tell me the way to go out.
Oh you didn ` t recognize me , you had come to my garage yesterday, I had repaired your car.
I had fallen asleep in your car.
In my car, is your mind alright?
Its absolutely unsound, else why would I have to take so much trouble for five rupees and twelve annas?
Father, in my opinion, he has gone hid on the roof.
Then I will blow him off with a bullet.
Listen, there is probably some garbage in the carburetor and also the brake cannot be applied properly.
First you pay the earlier bill then I will do the second work.
But I have come here for the first time.
Hey why are you panicking so much?
Please send for a glass of water for me.
How can I sit in the car with you?
How did this police inspector come here?
Last night a thief had come to our house, for that.
Last night a famous jeweler by the name of Lalchand in your locality was murdered.
His corpse was found on the road.
Before the arrival of the police that rouge ran away from there.
It is possible that some man from their gang had entered your house.
Then Inspector Sahab search properly, because the rouge has seen my house.
You don ` t worry, it is a matter of murder! I will investigate specially.
Thank you, till then I will go keep this jewellery etcetra in the bank.
First let me conduct an inquiry with your driver.
Inquire properly Inspector Sahib, it is very important for the rouge to get caught.
Last night since the thief has come my heart has been panicking like this.
Did a thief really come into your house?
Then am I lying?
In my opinion that wasn ` t any thief, he was a very great hermit.
That is why he left after eating five fruits, three bananas and two apples.
Why did you start the discussion about the thief in front of daddy?
You had started saying everything, you are absolutely mad.
Till now what madness have you seen?
Just meet my brothers then you will come to know.
I am very less compared to them.
Uncle, when Renu will get married then you will yearn to eat like this.
You are absolutely right child!
Why child you haven ` t heard the name of King Hardayal?
His younger brother Rajkumar Prashchand is returning from abroad in just a few days.
Raja Sahab was saying that the boy is very promising, is good looking also and nature is also very nice.
In my opinion that boy is worthy of you in every respect.
Worthy of me, then are you talking about my marriage?
What else, uncle wants to make you a princess.
Then have you decided the matter?
No child without your consent how can I decide the matter.
Prakash will come, you see him.
If you like him then say yes.
Father, I will not marry any Rajkumar.
You must be bursting with joy on hearing the name of Rajkumar.
You have made a face as if you are really angry.
Alright, this time I will tell Uncle that Rajkumar will not do, get her married to some Nawab or King.
I knew that you would definitely come one day.
I have been waiting for you since long.
Are you sleeping or awake?
Oh! Why are you screaming like this?
I had come to give the bill of the car.
You all have become troubled on my coming.
No no, there is no matter for trouble if you wanted to pay the bill you could have come to the office.
I had gone to the office to pay the bill but even there a boy was dancing.
Listen I have some work, can I take Mannu with me?
I will always remember this day.
Not just the day this night will also be remembered by me very well.
After going home how many punches I will get from my elder brother only I know.
You fear your brother so much?
No no I am not scared, have to be scared.
The thing is actually that people love me a lot, I too love those people a lot.
That is why I feel scared that such a thing should not happen because of which he gets angry.
Renu you don ` t understand it is seven o ` clock.
Kishenchand ji, if you say yes then I will feel relieved.
Raja Sahab, you have brought the relation, how can I say no?
But the matter is this that it is important to ask Renu once too.
Sure but I have already selected Renu for my younger brother.
But when is Prakash returning from abroad?
He is about to reach in a few days and if God desires then you will be as happy on seeing him as I am happy on seeing Renu.
Son is this design liked.
I say Raja Sahab what is the need for this?
Does anyone come empty handed to see a girl, it is a matter of auspicious gift.
Take it child, if it is the wish of Raja Sahab how can we refuse?
Even though she is the only child of such a wealthy father she is so gentle and shy.
Mannu you have not yet seen the world.
I am saying for your benefit, woman is the root of all problems.
One should remain away from even her shadow.
Then why do you keep a photo of a girl with you?
I was not going to hide this matter from both of you.
I had thought will tell you when the time comes.
Prakash you don ` t know me yet I think ahead.
Then you had a suspicion that Ramlal would get arrested..
Not suspicion, I was certain I just wanted to see how clever he is.
But Raja Sahab if he told his secrets to the police then!
No he cannot be so bold.
Have you heard the name of Seth Kishanchand.
He can buy three-four kings like you.
It seems like a new scheme is building in your mind.
Raja Sahab as far as I think you have already tried a scheme like this before.
I was thinking Raja Sahab that you have such wealth even then why do you make such a type of scheme?
Prakash when you will get wealth you will understand.
Only people with wealth need wealth, hungry people just need bread.
Do you have any objection to this speed of mine?
By the way if you want to see my real speed then you come tomorrow.
At Ju airport, there is car racing there I have also made an entry there.
If you will come there then I will definitely win.
Yes, now I will definitely have to come else how will you win?
Why didn ` t you tell me earlier I would also have come with you.
What did I know that you were also going to come here.
I had to come for Kumar Sahab but how are you here?
Kumar Sahab maybe I did not prove lucky for you.
Mannu won your reward and went.
Renu your marriage has been arranged with this Kumar.
Well child you two sit I have very important work.
You know that we are three brothers.
I have brought up both my brothers with much care.
Till now they respected me but today didn ` t listen to me.
I am talking about Mannu you are responsible for him.
I have never thought Mannu to be a toy for pleasing the heart.
I know why you are saying all this.
What do you know.
Only that one girl has betrayed you, broken your heart.
But this does not mean that all girls are like that.
If the time comes, I will prove it.
All girls are the same.
Anyway I don ` t want to argue with you.
I want, that you stop meeting Mannu.
This will make you happy.
I am not talking about my happiness.
If Mannu will get happiness from this then I will never meet him.
This is really a great injustice.
Elder brother is a boxer when he feels like he can deliver a punch.
Even if we want what do we younger brothers do Mannu.
Big brother is this injustice or not?
At night time it is not a good thing to roam around with girls.
Was there anything lacking regarding our hospitality for you?
Renu what is the need for you changing costumes?
Oh! Now you like Rajkumar so much that without him you don ` t feel peace.
I hate even the sight of your brother ` s face.
Mohan now the days of your life are over.
He will not say anything to anybody.
If you want to save his life then simply agree to get married to Praksah.
What, never, I will consider dying better before marrying that scoundrel.
Absolutely right, you don ` t worry about his threats.
Don ` t say that, because of me you have landed in this trouble.
Mohan! We cannot get out from here in any way.
It is easy to get caught but very difficult to come out.
I am Renu the daughter of Seth Kishanchand.
I have seen you somewhere.
For ten years apart from these walls no one has heard my voice and you say that you have seen me.
For ten years no one has seen me, I am trapped for ten years.
Help us free us from here.
Raja Sahab you here, how is Renu?
Nothing like that you sit, there is nothing to worry about.
But I am unable to understand why these people have brought me here like this?
Sethji at this moment of happiness we thought that it is very important for you to be present.
Today we are getting Kumar married to Renu.
Sethji forgive us everything had to be done in a hurry under compulsion.
I have got the magistrate called.
Daddy! This scoundrel got you here too.
These people are very bad, very dangerous Daddy.
Now its better for you that you silently allow Renu ` s wedding to happen.
Definitely not, I will never let my daughter get married to a scoundrel.
You will allow, if you love Renu then this wedding will definitely happen.
Good girls never go against their father.
This wedding will be got done by your daddy.
Definitely not, I will not let anything happen against the wishes of my daughter.
I have understood everything and now after ten years I got the satisfaction that whatever I thought about you was all wrong.
In my opinion Mannu and Renu should not be kept apart.
If you don ` t have any objections.
What objection will I have in this.
National Sports Stadium is filled to the brim with spectators, the final two minutes of the thrilling final of the World Men ` s Hockey Championship.
India is trailing behind Pakistan by one goal.
Indian captain Kabir Khan, the best forward of India, is bringing spirit to his team.
The tension of India-Pakistan game can be clearly reflected on the faces of the officials.
In these two countries match often becomes much bigger than game and this match is also just like that.
Now only one and a half minutes left and India must do something fast to refrain from losing.
Ball is still with Pakistan ` s defender.
All of India ` s responsibility is now on Kabir Khan.
Don ` t turn around and look Mother! Let ` s go.
How can I not see Kabir! Your grandfather had collected every penny and made this with such fondness.
Your father had got the windows made with his first salary, my palanquin had come here son.
And whether someone gives me support or not, our colony people will definitely give us support, you see.
What is the decision of you people?
What Uttam ji! You are repeating the same thing again and again, what do you have to do about their coach, you become it.
Hockey world cup is in three months, the team can ` t go just like that right?
However it goes, it will lose and come.
Indian women ` s hockey team has not been able to do anything, neither will it do anything, its a government tour, I say, you become the coach and go.
Anyway this team has to get disqualified after a few matches.
With this excuse you can go roam abroad with wife etc.
I cannot understand, why do you people take women ` s hockey seriously?
Putan ji! These are women who use rolling pins, now where will they keep running around wearing knickers.
If you people stay in the Association and talk these things then...
We are in the Association, have seen the world, that is why we are talking these things.
From your side you chose the top sixteen players and brought them, you have even gone to this Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Jharkhand, Andhra, Mizoram and Manipur.
Now where will you get a coach for them?
You want to get your lost respect by support of this team, such a team which cannot play with even the school teams of European countries.
I want a team like that.
I have done my work, you can still think.
Kabir! This is not a team its a grave. Why are you walking into it?
This team will not get a better coach than you, but think about yourself buddy.
We had not lost that match because of you Kabir, you had almost hit a goal against them right.
But they hit. Against me, my team, my country, my family.
One mistake is forgiven for all.
Kabir! Why have you come back here?
To get this team the World Cup.
Have you run away and come from a mental institution you two, what do you want?
Are you the Ramlila people? You will not get the stadium before Diwali, go!
Oh man! These two are hockey players.
Name Kabir Khan, I am the coach, of the Indian National Women ` s Hockey team, which I have been told is you.
Have all players reached Krishna ji?
Which player is good, which bad, I will take this decision Krishna ji! Thank you.
You cannot keep the captain of a state team out like this.
Neither can I hear the name of a state, nor can I see them, I can only hear the name of one country India, and there is no place on this team for latecomers.
I have been told that from twenty five crore girls of this country the best hockey players were found to be you.
Your fate is good and bad too because now I will take the decision for this.
For me you are only those sixteen girls who have some fondness for hockey, don ` t keep any hope above this, you will regret it.
Is this any way, to treat national level players.
We are children? We don ` t know training?
He is the coach, not God, come, lets rest.
You get very angry, it seems like you will break his head.
Sir! How long more do these girls have to sit?
I don ` t think anybody can teach these girls to play hockey together.
Playing hockey is a far off thing, all of them need to be taught something else before that.
No girl will stay with a girl from their state, coach sir has said.
Let him keep saying, if we don ` t follow then!
Rest everybody has agreed, if you have any problem then talk to coach sir.
Sit all day in the sun, change beds at night, they are running a national camp or refugee camp.
Oh, it is the wedding of the sister of Sameer jijaji. Amma - Babu has said to call.
Rakesh! Do you know, this is the national camp.
Daughter, relationships first, sports later, see you were persisted so we let you play.
Now we are calling, come back by the next train.
Rakesh please, understand, I cannot come, I have waited all my life for this camp.
Vidya! You are very great, but I am not as great as you.
I will not wait for you all my life .
The wedding is day after tomorrow, come if you want to, else don ` t come.
They want a daughter-in-law then they want children, they want care, but I don ` t have anything right now with me apart from this hockey stick.
If you want to go then go for one or two days.
If I go now then I will not be able to come back ever.
Sometimes I feel whether its that wrong to play in this country ?
No, we can play house, we can play politics, we can play cricket, but hockey is a slight problem.
Have you heard the name of Muhammad bin Tuglaq?
He was the emperor five hundred years back, everybody used to call him mad he had irritated everybody, he stopped the production of coins of gold and silver and started coins of brass.
If you have this much intelligence then why don ` t you use it in the game?
You people keep kicking your heels here, see who has come downstairs.
What happened? Has some film star come?
The secret keeper didn ` t tell anyone, she is his fiancee, she has got a day off till morning from Kabir sir.
See, how she is dancing and playing.
Come on leave it, let us also play.
Hey! Come on buddy, we are rotting at this bench for the last seven days.
We are players, not some association who will sit on benches.
Thank God Sir, the situation came a little under control.
Its not come under control Krishna ji! Its about to go out of it.
Krishna ji! Make her drink water and make her go out.
These are the best hockey players of India, will go to the world championship, will hoist the flag of India.
The association people say the correct thing, how will these people who roll the rolling pin play hockey.
Those who cannot play as a team, how will they win the world cup?
I had said earlier, only those players are needed in this team who are playing first for India, then for their teammates in this team, if after that too some strength is left then for yourself.
I think it was a little too much for today. They are but girls, how much can they do! If you search for strength like boys in them then.
I am searching for intention, not strength Krishna ji! For playing like a team you need intention not strength.
But Sir, like this they will make you their enemy.
If they can be each other ` s friends by making me their enemy then this is a very small price for making a team Krishna ji.
Why are you people not in the round?
The team does not want to practice with you.
Everybody wants, that the coach should be changed.
I will give one slap to all of you.
Why Krishna ji! Why will you slap us? Have we sold the country and come?
I came back to hockey after seven years thinking that the reason why my team lost, I will defeat that reason once.
But today I lost again.
You don ` t have a problem with me.
You have a problem for the reason that I forced you to play with each other, instead of against each other.
I made you think about your team before yourself, I forced you for playing for India before your state.
Alright, you people have won, I have lost.
But I do not have any regret of being defeated by you, I regret this fact that I was defeated by my country.
Think once again sir, a good team will be stopped in the making sir.
Today is my last day in this camp.
I am taking the full staff on lunch before leaving, if anyone from you wants to come with us they can come.
I had told you right, that to make a team we need intention, not strength, today for the first time I have seen the intention Krishna ji.
I am going for the world cup now.
What kind of mad things are you saying, you will postpone our wedding for the world cup?
If this was your world cup then?
That is a different thing. That is the world cup of cricket, its a very big thing.
This is also a big thing for me.
Go play world cup, if you lose you will become my wife and if you win even then you will become my wife.
It is not as if when you come back from the world cup the entire country will be chanting your name.
The way the mind of that Bindiya is working, is it right for her to stay on the team?
I don ` t know Krishna ji! But it will not be right for the most experienced player of the team to not be there.
We will not be able to deal with her.
We will not be able to win without her.
This is the silver medal of your world cup right sir, what is it doing with this?
I am trying to change it to gold by rubbing it, if the situation comes for me to sell it in Chor Bazar, at least should get the right price for it.
Kabir Sir! Its better if you forget the world cup.
And tell those girls too to whom you are showing foolish dreams.
But our talk was about making this team ready for the world cup.
It wasn ` t on stamp paper Kabir sir, that you will corner us.
But the talk was held in front of me Tripathi ji!
Then let us talk even now in front of you.
But this team is absolutely ready for the world cup.
If they get ready for the moon tomorrow we will not be sending them Uttam sir!
The team cannot go for world cup, this decision has been taken.
Why don ` t you say clearly that you are snatching the sponsor of the women ` s hockey team and giving it to the men ` s hockey team?
You are all players, why do you get into those things about which you have no connection?
Let one match take place between my team and your team.
You mean between men ` s team and women ` s team.
Same, your team and my team, if we lose then we lose and if we win then the world cup.
Alright, let it be day after tomorrow morning.
Hey! At least give some time for preparation.
Day after tomorrow morning means day after tomorrow morning, yes or no?
Let us meet on the field day after tomorrow morning.
Tripathi ji! Even your team needs to practice.
Firstly, they will not win and if by chance they even win...
By mistake, they cannot win even by mistake, you think, by how many goals will they lose.
And if they lose once then the topic remains forever closed.
I have full confidence on this team, does this team have confidence on themselves?
See, you are not competing against these boys.
Do not think that your match is against these sixteen boys.
Your match is against all those boys of this country, who think that girls cannot play as well as boys, cannot work as well as boys, cannot make decisions as well as boys.
Your match is against every such idiot who has forgotten that if girls can give birth to him then they can do anything, anything!
Play together with each other, play with all your strength.
If it is enough then shall we get it stopped Kabir sir , or do you want to play more.
We had said, these are Indian women, where will they go wearing knickers.
Oh sir, you have fallen quite a bit. Will you be able to get up yourself or should I tell the girls to pick you up.
Hello, I am Kapil Verma and I welcome you.
In Melbourne ` s state hockey and netball centre where in the first match of the world women ` s hockey championship India is against six time world champion Australia.
Both teams are facing each other. The demeanor of the Australian team clearly reflecting the stance of a world champion.
Salute to the national flags, respect for their tricolour in the eyes of Kabir Khan and his players.
Enthusiasm among the spectators, players ready and the match begins.
In the first minute of the match the pressure building on the Indian team, coach Kabir Khan is cheering on his players.
Probably the last strategy by Kabir Khan for saving the match which is going out of control.
Bindiya! What are you doing? What were you doing on the field?
After today you will not play in any match of this world championship.
The exit of Bindiya from this world championship is almost certain after such a big loss in the first match itself.
If there is a chance then it is just that she defeats England in the match which will take place tomorrow, but looking at the form of the Indian team it can only be dimly hoped.
You are welcomed in Melbourne, where England is playing for two points in group A, but India for keeping her hopes alive for the world championship.
The Indian team of coach Kabir Khan which has surprised everybody by advancing continuously is going to play that match tomorrow morning which could stop it from this climb.
Because if India wins this quarter final then it will go into the semi finals, but if it loses then it will be out of this world championship.
India is against Argentina tomorrow, the team which injured seven girls of the opposition team by its rough game in the last game.
This Indian team of coach Kabir Khan has reached the semi finals of the world championship.
But now they face Korea, who in the entire tournament has not even let a team reach its goal.
We will not even be able to move like this, playing is a far-off option, who will be able to break a game like this?
How to break a man-to-man marking, only you know, the match is beginning go!
India has entered the finals of the world championship and from the condition of this stadium you can judge how the team must be feeling at this moment!
And how the coach of this team must be feeling who had been refused to let this team be brought here a few months back.
You did a marvel sister! This army of demons has made a backward bridge from Lanka.
Your blessings are there, on these girls Sukhlal ji.
Those Ramlila people had come sister, I told them that this is the Indian women ` s hockey team ground, its waiting for its team.
We will not give it to anybody, now only hockey will be practiced here that ` s all.
Sukhlal ji! Your curd - rice is missed a lot.
You guys win the world cup and bring it child, I will feed you curd rice all my life, you cannot lose, don ` t lose.
No Sukhlal ji! We will die and come but we will not lose and come.
What are you doing here sir?
See, I am seeing a white man hoisting the flag of India for the first time.
We reached till the final, is it not a dream.
The coach of Australia and its payers are stupid! They have not noticed till now that both the Man Fridays of India are not passing the ball to each other!
What do you think, they will not take advantage of this!
Komal! You will not be able to cheat me, at least don ` t cheat yourself.
You had come to Delhi to play hockey by fighting with your parents, brother, village everybody, but now you are playing something else not hockey and even you know this.
Tell her sir! She had started everything.
And you will finish it in tomorrow ` s match.
You both are not children. You know it very well that if you don ` t play together tomorrow then we will not win this final.
Once a team of India had lost a final just like this.
How heavy the burden of that loss is, you will probably not be able to understand it now, but when you do you will be able to tolerate it.
You both do not have that much strength, no one has that much strength.
Now this is upon you both, whether you want to play with your team or against your team.
And today that night is upon us which was awaited by everybody, today is the final of the women ` s hockey world championship.
That team which won everybody ` s heart by its performance here. But there is a big difference between winning hearts and winning the championship.
You have seventy minutes. Maybe the most special seventy minutes of your life.
Today whether you play good or bad, you will remember these seventy minutes for the rest of your life.
Then how we should play, I will not tell you today.
I will just say that go and play these seventy minutes to the fullest.
Because after this in the coming years whether something is right or not, whether something remains or not, you win or lose but no one can take away these seventy minutes from you, no one.
Then, I have thought how we should play in this match, today I will not tell you in fact you will tell me , by playing.
Because I know that if each player of this team plays the best hockey of their lives in these seventy minutes, then even God cannot ask for these seventy minutes back from you.
Then go and snatch your seventy minutes from yourself, this life, your God and every such person who has not trusted you.
The Indian team has told in the first minute of the match that they are not going to play this match like any underdog.
How important it is for the mental strength of this Indian team to score the first goal in this match, that is clearly reflected in the face of their coach.
Australia is not a team to tolerate its humiliation lightly and its regular attacks will put India into difficulties.
The Indian women ` s hockey team returning from the world championship has done something for which the heart of every Indian had been longing for.
And no one has brought this win but the most successful centre forward of the country Kabir Khan.
In the faces of those hundreds of people standing in wait at this airport there is the fervour of win and only one name on the hearts, Kabir Khan.
But Kabir Khan cannot be seen, where is Kabir Khan?
The credit for this win of Indian hockey is being given to the coach of the team Kabir Khan.
Second June 1947, one such date in the history of India on which it was decided to lay the foundation on the ground of compromise.
Among the Congress, the Muslim League and Lord Mountbatten in the Viceroy House signatures were done on the deed of Partition.
Hindustan was divided into two pieces, the second piece became Pakistan.
Another clause was kept in the agreement that there will be no transfer of population.
Which meant that whichever Muslim wanted to remain in India he would stay in India and whichever Hindu wanted to live in Pakistan he would in Pakistan, but this just could not be.
Every Hindu in this area is given a warning that there will be a special train for India from Pipla station today evening.
There was a train of eight coaches at Pipla station and there were ten thousand people.
It was as if fate, destiny, Allah, God everything has fallen asleep.
Kill the old people, young people, children, don ` t leave anybody.
In this way from different parts of Pakistan trains full of the corpses of Hindus and Sikhs were sent to India.
Hindus and Sikhs in different parts of India got enraged and from the fire of this communal hatred even those who lit the fire could not be spared.
We are the renowned businessmen of this country, it is the duty of the government to protect us.
You leave us till the Delhi airport, that ` s all.
Daroga ji! If even one man enters I swear on God you will not forget the name of Ashraf Ali Khan for the rest of your life.
Those lighting the fire themselves got scared of the fire.
Mister Ashraf Ali! This is not the time to be angry.
Only two hours are left, on the special train from Amritsar to Lahore, you come fast.
Brother Sarafraj had called so many times from Lahore to get out fast.
How could I have left the entire business spread in India?
How much money had we given to the Muslim League, and we had tried so hard that along with Lahore, the entire Punjab comes into Pakistan.
Passengers travelling to Lahore must get on the train as fast as possible.
Tara! Save us Tara!
No one will touch her, she is known to me.
Oh Tara! You have become mad.
You will flow every drop of blood for this girl, she is Muslim.
She is Muslim? Here now she has become a Sikhni.
Now go and handle chickens, I will go and meet the Major in the canteen.
Hey! Its not Major, its manager in the canteen.
They make me do all the work of the canteen.
I got startled on hearing English suddenly.
You all know very well that my English is a little weak.
Mister! We give you much trouble.
What trouble is there in this, you all stay away from the city in the hostel.
You all keep praising me but you didn ` t put forward the thing about my singing at the Salana Jalsa.
We will make you meet a new music teacher for making you sing songs at our annual function.
Oh yes, there is a small difficulty, our music teacher can hear at a higher volume.
Oh, I sing at a high volume since childhood.
Listening to his high notes even the people in the neighbourhood lose their notes, there are fights everyday.
His screws are a little loose.
Ok mister Tara Singh! You reach the music room at 12 sharp on Sunday, ok.
It seems, I will definitely sing in this Salana Jalsa.
Yes! If the music teacher does not apply the break in between.
What , me become the music teacher?
I do not like making fun of anyone.
Hey Sakina! You are a student, not the principle.
I understand that you all want that mister singer should go away forever.
He should not mention singing in the annual function ever.
Yes, because we have told him that our teacher hears loudly.
Yes madam! I am Tara Singh.
Speak a little louder, Awara Singh?
No no, not Awara Singh, Tara Singh.
She cannot even hear my voice, how will she listen to my song.
Madam! Kanchan has sent me to you for singing.
Song, then say that, but have you ever sung a song?
When I sing on the stage in the village, then the entire village whistles.
Very good Tara ji! your voice knocks directly at the heart.
I didn ` t know that you sing so sweetly.
Then Madam! Then I will get an opportunity to sing at the Annual Function?
Sorry Tara ji! I beg pardon.
Actually, we all girls were together having fun with you.
I am no music teacher, I am a student here.
My name is Sakina.
Tara ji! Can I say one thing to you, it was a pleasure meeting you.
I will talk to the principal and will try that you may sing at the annual function.
One minute, it was nice meeting you too.
At least you thought about this poor man this much.
Madam! Actually I wanted to talk to you about something.
I had told you right that I am not madam, I am Sakina.
But for me you are madam.
Did that matter of ours go ahead or not, I mean the singing matter.
Actually the thing is that the principal says that you don ` t study in this college, that is why you will not be able to sing in the programme.
Oh, I am not a student of this college, that I will sing in the function.
I will meet you tomorrow at the function.
The God gives talent to only a few special people.
And that is the theme, in this programme of ours today.
The theme which Mrs. Lamba mentioned we are presenting that in a new way.
Like an innocent child does not think about small or big before giving his smile, a flower its fragrance, the Sun its light, like that nature bestows the talent of singing without discrimination.
A talented person like that is present among us, Mister Tara Singh!
Why did you show pity on this poor me, whatever was there with me everything was lost.
Hey Tara Singh! You?
I had to buy a gift for you.
Often when people part ways, they give gifts.
See Madam! It took me two full nights to think what I should buy for you.
Because the gift should be beautiful like you, should be pure.
Madam! I came home.
You wash your face, I will bring clothes for you.
Don ` t misunderstand me here, I had to put vermilion on your forehand for saving your life.
You don ` t worry, you are completely safe here.
You only want to know whether anybody survived or not on the train which left yesterday from Amritsar.
Oh Kaka ji! Who will survive in this flow of blood?
White people finished India.
This is the luggage of those unlucky people, who were cut up in the Amritsar train yesterday.
You see, if there is any luggage belonging to your people.
Tara! Someone wants India and someone wants Pakistan.
You were also killing the Muslims, then why did you leave me, I also wanted to die.
Madam ji! In circumstances when hell breaks loose, then man goes mad, comes down to killing and dying.
Madam ji! I have lit the pyre of my family with these hands.
Those corpses burnt to ashes, but this body is burning even today.
This story is not only yours and mine, it is of thousands of Sikhs, Hindus, Muslims.
No matter how cruel life is, we have to live Madam ji.
You leave us to the Muslim camp.
He will leave us to our Uncle ` s place in Lahore.
We have a very big house there.
You are saying the right thing, Madam ji.
Anyway this house is not worthy of you.
But you in a refugee camp? No Madam, no, I will leave you till your home Lahore.
Early morning we shall leave for Lahore.
Borders were divided, the elements may or may not make us meet again, God only knows this.
We will not go to Lahore.
Madam! Why don ` t you want to go to Pakistan?
I told you that I don ` t want to go.
The country which broke it up, which killed my brother Gurdeep, my sister-in-law, my nieces, you want to build a relationship with it.
Uncle! Take this, kill me, but know one thing, hatred only burns, turns into ashes.
Whether that is heart, house, country and because of this hatred a sword has come into my hand.
If at the crucial moment the hand of love had not claimed me today even Tara would have burnt to ashes.
Who else is there in this world who is mine Uncle?
You will not listen to me, alright Uncle!
I am speaking from the Pakistan consulate from Delhi, I wanted to speak with Khan sahab.
Madam! There is a lady here who is saying that she is the daughter of Khan sahab.
Saku! How are you?
I am fine Ammi!
One minute Saku! Let me call your Abbu.
Listen! Saku has called, from India, she is alive, and well.
Saku my child! Where all did I not search for you?
Alright see, you apply for a visa at the consulate there.
We have known people there.
I cannot tell you how happy I am.
Abbu! You came till here and didn ` t even come down.
Daughter! If I stepped on the ground of India then thousands of wounds would have opened.
This land snatched away our son Aslam too and anyway this land is no longer ours and neither is this country nor the people here.
Our land, our people, our country is, Pakistan.
Sarafraj! I have got a reason to live because of Safina coming, now we will never feel the absence of Aslam.
I am aware of your emotions.
If I have a worry then only this that Sakina ` s past might not affect the future yet to come.
Sakina is our daughter Sarafraj! She is not outside her father ` s influence in any way .
If your unlce ` s house wasn ` t in Pakistan and these houses of ours were not here then...
Ammi! But everyone had to face these problems and destruction, but why are we now being put into difficulty.
Sakina! You only think about yourself, not about our honour.
I have got married Ammi! It is not a joke, we even have a son.
I cannot live without him and my son Ammi!
Why, aren ` t we living after losing our son?
This border which caused a division between India and Pakistan has given birth to never ending distances.
Political people create distances and the result has to be borne by the common man, I will never tolerate this Ammi!
It is very surprising, an educated and sincere daughter like you, cannot understand even on explaining so much.
Daughter! If it suddenly starts raining while walking on the road then man becomes helpless and takes the support of some or wall and you also did the same thing.
This is not true father! He didn ` t force me in any way.
He was risking his life to leave me till Lahore.
You don ` t know father! It is difficult to find a big hearted person like him in the whole world.
And a helpless and compelled father like me too.
Daughter! I can completely understand that it will take at least some months for you to come out of what happened in the past.
This will not be possible father! Please send me back to my husband.
Saku!Our every step goes forward and now you have that step of political opportunity whose steps can go till the highest chair of politics.
I want to see you become the future of Pakistan.
How will I explain to you father! Now my future is my family, my home.
Come Khan sir! Id Mubarak.
Sakina still has not come, go and see please.
A lot of personalities of the city are present in this Id festivities, if you will not be decent then there will be great humiliation of the family.
Stop, one does not leave the support of hope so soon daughter!
If you will take care of the happiness of Malik jaan then Munni sahiba! he will understand the condition of your heart too.
This is, the editor of the famous newspaper ` Jung ` here Mister Hirdat Sahab.
I am printing the story of the atrocities committed on you in India on the front page of my newspaper child!
May hell break loose on that Jat who kept you in hell.
Now I am awaiting that day eagerly Ashraf sahab! when the reins of the administration will be in the hands of Sakina.
You are doing the right thing Sarafraj! If the spice of compassion adds to governance then the cooking pot gets even more enticing.
You changed the whole game by not signing on the child ` s visa.
Yes, I did not let the visa get cleared.
Because I cannot see you with that Jat.
I did a great mistake that I came with you for the sake of love.
If I had known that in lieu of this love my family will get a punishment greater than death then I would never have come here.
This high status, these luxuries, a high position in the government, is all these punishment?
Know this thing, I will not let you mix this widespread business, this political prestige into ashes.
Whether you want it or not , cry or scream , you have to stay in Pakistan now.
If this is your decision father! then alright, I will not go to India, will not even call, will not even write a letter.
I will just wait for him, because I know, he will definitely come to take me one of these days.
That, that Indian will come here, that Jat, our enemy, who bled us.
He will come to our country, our land, I swear on God even the news of the death of that Jat will not reach India.
Sir! So many weeks have passed, let me have my visa back.
Now I have brought the papers of my marriage from the Gurudwara too.
Nothing will come from this Tara Singh! I have told you many times before also that the government of both countries considers marriages taking place during Partition as illegal.
If my and Sakina ` s marriage is fake then is my child here is also fake ?
By frequently commuting from Amritsar to Delhi our pockets have been emptied .
Oh God ! You have come again to trouble me , what mess you create everyday .
I have become a spectacle Iqbal sir! You had said that you will make a visa for my child in three days.
I will finish your everyday matter.
Listen carefully to what I am saying , I have orders from above that you will not be allowed to go to Pakistan.
Iqbal sir! If there will not be a stamp on a paper then will Tara Singh not go to Pakistan?
No force, no border can stop me from making my child meet his mother.
You will go to Pakistan, you are crazy, that too for the woman who left you.
I did not trust those people from the beginning, I just gave in to your insistence.
I will get her right now.
Mummy also left and went, now you are also leaving and going, I will also come.
Gullu! How are you? Is everything alright?
The train of life is running my love!
I swear I miss you a lot.
Biji used to say that I have two sons, one Kake, and another Gullu.
I know Gullu! But I don ` t want to be some problem for you.
Oh, a friend is an assistance for a friend, is respite, I swear if I get my own way, then I will take all your troubles upon myself.
But what to do Kake! The height of Ashraf Ali is higher than the skies and we have no height before him.
Make your parents happy girl, the procession is waiting outside.
Why are you burning it? You are the qazi right, you work is, to listen to the yes or no and leave.
Don ` t forget this, it is also the duty of the qazi to stop a crime.
A crime is that, which you have done, in our religion when both the boy and girl are not Muslim their marriage is considered illegal.
A breath can forget to come into the body, can forget coming out in the morning, you can forget your God, but that I forget him, that is impossible.
If I could die then I would have long ago.
But I know that he will come here enduring a thousand difficulties, will call me.
How did you dare keep a foot inside our country?
I will cut you in so many pieces that you won ` t be recognized, you people had shed a lot of blood of your brothers.
Did you people not shed the blood of our people, you had killed my parents, my sisters everyone.
But that was a madness which passed, today I have come to take my love, I have come to take the mother of my child.
I have forgotten the hatred, you too forget it.
Forget the hatred? That too of you Indians, if I could have my way I would blow each Indian with a bullet.
Which Indians will you kill with bullets? Because of us Indians, you people have an existence.
The whole world knows that during Partition we have given you 65 crore rupees only then did you get some relief.
You don ` t have the capacity to take shelter from rain, you all are talking of shooting!
Be a father and give away your daughter, only that is desirable for everybody.
Else, if today this Jat gets angry then hundreds will die with him.
You will have to accept two conditions of ours.
First condition, you will have to accept Islam.
Second condition, you will have to live here in Pakistan only.
If you can become a Hindu for him, then can he not become Muslim for you?
If Islam is acceptable to you then its ok, say Islam Zindabad, say Pakistan Zindabad.
Now say Hindustan Murdabad.
Your Pakistan remains forever , I have no objection tot hat , but our Hindustan was forever , is forever and will remain forever.
Forgive me son! In the greed for government I had forgotten the biggest religion humanity.
