Culture of any human society is a mode through which he want in various parts of his life to reach at his totality of spirit .
Our most life passes in earning livelihood and in dalliance .
To know cultural characteristics of any race , nation or society you need to study the methods of passing rest-period .
Usually it is said that culture of India is spiritual and western culture is material , but such perspective is only outer .
Culture of India was and is as material as culture of any other country .
Speciality is only whereby it differs from other cultures that it covers spiritual cloths in such way to material culture that expatriates find only supernaturality here and nothing else .
If sporadically such means of entertainment were not been there then possibly life would be miserable for human being .
Any human doesn ` t roam 24x7 in worry of livelihood .
In ancient period due to less population of the country , facile economic condition and some what less artificial demands of the countryman , they didn ` t have lack of leisure .
They used to pass this free time according to their own interest .
Successively considering various tools of entertainment center various entertainment activities , craft and knowledge were originated .
Mental peace is not available anywhere to creature trapped in the illusion of world .
Whenever see , he is running after mirage .
But human psyche is a bizarre element , which can not be steady on a single object for a long period .
He gets bore of monotony .
Change is necessary to keep it live .
Some variety , some speciality come in monotony by change in conditions .
Thus custom of human life keeps on moving .
It is necessary for survival that she should keep her helth well and develop her impetus and mental power .
A saying in English is that a healthy mind lives in a healthy body .
There is a saying in Sanskrit , which means that people have different type of interest .
Due to some somewhat uniqueness of human being there is somewhat variety in food , way of life , sartorial etc . of each .
Thus speciality of entertainment of modern era is that it is done by putting up a goal .
Even though goal kept hidden from the eyes of students and workers .
However speciality of entertainment of ancient era was that nothing interplotation added in that like nowadays .
When occasion comes for enjoy , then people rejoice wholeheartedly .
People used to pet animal-bird at home to keep empowering emotion inherent in their heart .
Event and procession were used to organise for experience pleasure of socializing .
In that age of history of mankind , the main goal of entertainment was fulfillment of natural demands of senses and self-defense .
Ganbhoj in society was such popular in those days because thereby both hunger and thirst tended to be quiet .
Similarly , importance of bath is given so much in the ritual of those days because thereby mind get peace and body hygiene immediately .
Thus human being of premitive-period get education of solving problems of real life by means of entertainment .
After solution to the problems related to food and habitate , as he was getting opportunity and freedom , invention of various tools of entertainment was happened for personality development .
Addition to these , some people recieved satisfication by gambling and drinking .
Above mention means of entertainment include horse race , chariot race and hunting called sports in English .
Comparision of ability of two or more person is known as competition .
In famous olympia of old Greece olympic sports was used to happen in month of July of every fifth year .
On this ocassion unbroken peace was used to exist for a period of one month .
Availing it ` s facility spectators of all around Greece used to gathered at Olympia .
Olympia was a small city of Alice state .
Alice was in west and Sparta in right south of peloponnese peninsula .
These sports were performed in the honor of Zeus .
Temple of Jeus was in the particular part of the city , was known as Altice .
Stadium and Hipodrom were to the east of it .
Efforts and sports etc . were used to organised there only .
Sports of Olympia were used to considered national estate of the Greeks .
Therefore , only those youths and teens could participate in it who are born Greek .
Initial selection of contestant used to held in Alice , then they were given training for ten months .
The final selection and distribution of awards was used to happen under the auspices of the employees of Alice .
In initial situation , only ` stadium ` race of 200 yard used to happen th e ?
Fast runner youth of all Greece was used to assemble for compete in it .
Winner of stadium were used to consider as key person all around Greece .
Earlier there was a tradition of to make wear a wreath made of wild olive on his head .
In course of time chariot-race , horse race , wrestling , boxing , jump , javelin throw , dish throw etc . 12 were items were added .
Thing , watched or listen at Olympia conference , soon get propagated all around Greece .
We don ` t know exactly when sports of Olympia was started .
Some people say that at first Heracles had constituted it .
Whaterver , a consecutive list of winners is available 776 B . C . onwards .
Even after termination of freedom of Greece , these sports were used to happen till 393 A . D . .
Aitarey Brahman tells us that whenever disagreement used to occur among gods , then organising race competition they used to get sort out the controversy .
With simulation of the god custom of racing also started in human society , and Aitrey Brahmin reveals that reward used to given to winner of the competition .
Horse race is given name of ` aaji ` in Vedas .
Award was received on winning of horse race .
Care was taken of fast running horse .
For this , there was a demand of the fast running horse of Sindhu and Saraswati provinces .
In the context of Rajsuy Yagya , there was a tradition of horse race formally .
In ancient era , he was forced to be hunter in order to collect food of self-defence .
Children play the game of con-police , in which we get glimpse of hunter human of anciet period .
In ancient Rom , dancing on rope was very popular .
A robust rope was used to tie at extended height .
Riding on that , Juggler was used to move and dance .
Rigveda and Atharvaveda reveal that custom of boxing was existing in Vedic age .
That time boxing was not became means of entertainment .
It is known to all that both gambling and drug are addictions .
Gambling is the name of betting on uncertain outcome of any event or sports .
if the transaction is happened properly then both buyers and sellers are happy .
Gambling by cheating one provides his money to other one , thereby winner has to take enmity with defeated gambler .
Therefore , gambling is condemned everywhere .
Generally , ` Aksh-Krida ` was the name of gambling .
While playing many dices were used .
According to the Rigvidhan Brahmin there was a custom of devoting liquor to Ashvins .
Shatpath Brahmin says that liquor was also used devote to ancestors .
Consumption of animal was used to considered enormity for Brahmins .
Apart form the above mention means of entertainment occasionally ` Saman ` fairs used to organise in rural areas .
All resident and artist of the surrounding villages were used to participate in these .
It is known by analysis of entertainments prevailed in Vedic-age , that there was no lack of useful means of entertainments in villages during those days .
We remain amazed while seeing progress of Aryans in the field of supreme mood of entertainment .
Even complete drama had not developed but several pageants emerged .
Composition of creative games such as dance , song , poem and recapitulation of narratives were also invented .
At first , fairs and events were organised with the aim of unite heart of the Aryans of surrounding villages .
Many important changes took place in the field of entertainment in this period .
Competition of various race , which were prevalent in Vedic-age , almost stalled .
Supremely , description of several children 's ` games is there in the literature of this age , which were occasionally mentioned in Vedic literature .
Generally , purpose of the sporting is self satisfaction while giving joy to audience through activity .
Thus , they are often externally serious .
Really , tipical means of entertainment does not have any indirect goal and generally those are not functional , for example looking at the movement of uttal waves while lying on the pile of the dusky sand on a beach .
Despite sporadic changes all over the country in this age , ancient social constituents , customs and activities were not influenced by these .
Society started moving on Sanatan custom .
In these days rise and fall of Nand , Maurya , Shung , Kanv , Aandhra , Shaka , Kushan and Gupt empires happened step by step .
In these day county has reached on the extreme of progress in the all areas such as business , literature , art-skill , setting up colonies , apart from religious issues .
Apart from this major point is that Indian social structure remained unmoved , constant and stable despite many political turmoil and religious movements .
Since primitive-age , great emphasize is not given on social liberation in our country .
Successively several dynasties were emerged and dissolve in the history .
For few days Budhism , Jainism etc . had influence all over the country but they passed as a wind .
Society remained as it was .
Any extraordinary change could not happen in her style or tradition .
Therefore , any extraordinary change did not happen in routine of the everyday life of common people .
Tonality of their relief was sustained for longtime .
In this condition , means of entertainment were also developed along with festivals and fairs .
Pali texts have also put reasonable light on various kinds of tools of entertainment as well as other aspect of life of those days .
Hunter used to be familiar with animal psychology due to inclination with animal in the context of hunting and they used to succeed in the work according to it .
Such kind of wrestling is described in detail in Jatak-texts , which completely explores decoration of theater , Akhada , audience gallery , wrestling .
Gymnasium were used to be in middle , which surrounded by circular galleries , where the audience used to sit .
Occasionally women were also used to take part in the wrestling .
Like professional boxers of modern age , a category namely Mustik used to be in those days .
They used to earn livelihood through fighting by punch .
Apart to the above mention artificial fights , animal fights were also used to be there .
In this context fights of elephants , horses , buffaloes , bulls , goats , rams , chickens and quails or duck mentioned in Brahmjal Sutta .
It is memorable that bull fight used to take place in Thesali province of old Greece and Egypt and in some provinces , quail and roosters fight was considered very popular entertainment .
Apart from these many such entertainments were invented in this age , those one and only goal was to provide immediate entertainment to people trapped in the illusion of world .
Rich citizens usually go to `` walk out side `` in a garden located outside of the city leaving home for few days .
Mainly for entertainment leaving worries of active life behind people used to go into the gardens or in the shelter of dense forest to get peace of mind .
Occasionally people used to go into forests with food materials .
Some people express doubts regarding existence of drama in Vedic-age .
Generally `` Nat-Samajja `` term were used for Drama in Pali texts .
Acting was used to be in ` theater ` .
Curious audience used to seat at the stand or gallery and express complimentary acclamation as they get chance .
It seems that drama groups used to perform plays randomly in those days .
Except royal palaces , perhaps there was not any permanent theater .
It won ` t be irrelevant to say that drama of those days used to be full of dances and songs and lecture and dialogues were used to be less , which are characteristic of modern drama .
On the accound of celebrating festivals drinking was a common trend .
Usually people used to make wine in their home .
People used to play gambling with great gusto .
Gambling house was used to be decorated before the game starts .
In every condition bath is a tool of entertainment .
Bath is a necessary daily routin in hot countries to keep body fresh and mind happy .
In cold countries , In ancient age , it was considered a luxury .
In hot countries , most people take bath in river , stream , puddle , lake , etc .
But due to heavy winter bath can be taken in open spaces .
To make up the shortfall bathrooms were made .
Bathers can take bath according to their wish with cold or hot water and massage , make-up were there .
As discussion starts about bathrooms , notorious activities in public bathrooms of Romans automatically came in the memory .
Apart from these , large corridors used to be for food and innumerable small rooms used to be for meeting of love birds .
The bathroom were used to be of various types .
Poor people have to pay less fees for bathrooms .
Entry of rich people in bathrooms was costly .
Atmosphere of bathrooms or ` Jantaghar ` described in the Chullvagga of Vinay Pittak was faded in comparison of world famous ` Roman bath ` .
The biggest thing is that those bathrooms were not public .
` Jantaghar ` was the name of those rooms made for bath with hot water of steam .
The walls used to have plaster on them , floor was of brick , wooden or stone and roof was made by leather .
A wooden stool used to be there for sitting for bathers .
While taking steam bath , a custom to plaster scented soil on face was there , thereby face would not burn from heat .
body was used to wiped with delicate garment after the bath gets over .
Bath method of rulers described in the Prakit texts are mostly similar with the bath method of king Shudrak described in Kadambari .
As god Surya arrived in the midst of the sky , Shankh-dhvani along with sound of various musical instruments came out .
A bath-tub filled with scented water was kept in the midst and a bath-stool nearby of it .
King first entered in the Drauni as he arrives .
As custom of bath ended , conch sounded again .
Instrumental playing happened and Charans did praise recite .
Rulers of eastern part usually used to do exercise and bath etc . in the morning while king of the central part used to do bath etc . in the afternoon .
Oil - massage was accustomed in eastern province , people used to apply Amla paste on the forehead in middle province .
There was a custom of bathing in bathrooms in eastern province , bath used to have in open space in middle province .
Fortunately the thing lacking found in the Vedic literature , it is met in the Pali literature .
Those means of entertainment described above , generally these are related to adult persons .
Additions to these several useful children ` s plays are described in Pali literature .
Speciality of children is that they are naturally imitation lover .
Whatever they see adult doing , imitate them as it is .
Therefore , it is necessary to put good example before children .
Second thing is that they don ` t take sport as joke or mess-up .
All must have seen small girls celebrating wedding of the doll .
Specialty in this is that though adult audience assume it insignificant considering it play , girl player never take it as non-serious .
They bear all activities and customs related to marriage with seriously .
Children complete game related items so seriously and persistently that sharp psychologist quickly gets to know that whom natural inclination is where .
Because of this a psychologist considered this game a `` means of enlightenment `` for children .
Custom of playing ball among children was widely publicized .
Lose-win were also happen in it .
Akasham - while explaining this Sankrityayan said `` play in the path to sky `` .
Satik - disassembling each and every stone from the piled-up of the stones by nails .
Those who toches with the hand used to have defeat .
It might be called ensister of Carom of modern age .
At last this is need to say that there are some subjects could be considered as means of entertaiment among 64 arts .
Seaching of means of entertainment in this forest of spiritualilty is usually tough task .
But sometimes greenery of oasis may be seen in desert .
Tired traveller used take rest there by sitting a while .
Date has not been decided yet about creation of Jaina scriptures and texts .
After leaving of Bhadrabahu resident of Magadh Sthulbhadra became head of followers of Jain religion .
After Bhadrabahu only Sthulbhadra had complete knowledge of classical texts .
Same time , A religious assembly was organised in Patliputra in the supervision of Sthulbhadra for preservation of these .
12 parts were created by this assembly .
On the other side Digambars , followers of Bhadrabahu rejected these after returning from south .
In the course of the time scriptures and texts of Svetambars came all the way to extinction .
Observing this Aacharya Devriddhi Kshamashraman had organised a assembly -LRB- 454 or 467 AD -RRB- in Vallabhi -LRB- Gujarat -RRB- .
Again collection of all part was done by this council only .
There is no any space for doubt on authenticity of these texts .
Those were mainly based on manuscripts collected by the assembly of Patliputra .
Thus , those were traditional collection of voices derived from the holy mouth of Mahavir Swami .
But this should not be considered that creation of religious texts of Swetambars stalled here only .
Their belief about collection and creation of religious texts of Jainism that apart from Gandhars no one else can not collect parts , creation of Niryukt etc . can do veteran saint like Bhradbahu .
When lively citizens ` health was bored by monotony of life behind closed doors , they used to go the gardens for joy of outside according to the old customs .
For the time they stay there , they used to forget all hassles of life style and took joy of life while taking having fun .
Nowadays gimples of assemblies and committees are availbale in every village .
Generraly , people assembles in the evening and enjoys in such bodies .
Ruler itself was the gaurdian of this assembly .
Some times members of this used to do misdeed in the name of entertainment .
There is such a specialty in original Prakrit texts that is not found in contemporary Pali or Sanskrit texts .
It seems that all children and teenagers used to play with ball during those days .
Bat of the game was that whosever win , loser will carry him to his house on his shoulder .
After a while that psudo god started playing with those children by makover of a child .
Soon , he defeated .
Then soon he started runnin carrying Mahavir on shoulder .
As he kept running , his body expanded as of demons .
Seeing this child Mahvir slapped such a punch on his back that within second that demon squeezes to a Mosquito .
Then he requsted god and left the place .
Vardhman got a name `` Shrivir `` after this incident .
It is subject of sad that explainer didn ` t explained in detail the method of the play of Amal .
Generally , use of the ball was public ; generally , all children used to play with ball .
Sport-ground used to be in the cities to children ` s play .
Sometimes in the context of forest visit children in groups used to go and play in the forest .
Generally , habit such as drinking were less described in the orginal Prakrit texts .
Again , this is said in the same text at different place that a businessman namely Dhanna lived in the city of Rajgrih .
He had a slave son namely Pathak .
This is said regarding Pathak that he was skilled in the supervision and organization of the childrens ` plays .
Many such artists were in the society , who used to entertainment of people by performing their arts on special occasion .
Generally , demand of such professionals used to occur on the occasions of festival or Jan Yatra .
Like Brahmcharis and Snatak and Buddhist saints and lady saints of our society Jain saints and ladies saints were also denied to participate in such events where dance-song etc . happens .
However , it is known from Prakrit literature that great progress of Gandharva art had happened in these days .
However saints used to stay away from Gandharva etc . though dance-song-music etc . were widely prevalent in Indian society during those days .
These all fine arts were hugely developed because of patronage of leading personality such as ruler , reach people .
Popularity of song-music etc . was so wide that creation of theories related to musicology seems from religious literature of Jains .
From the perspective of age this theories are older than Natya-Shashtra by Bharata or not , however it is difficult to say anything but there are some similarities between both of these .
Four types of songs were described in the Sthanang sutra .
Basic structure of Musicology is narrated with efficiency in the Sthanang .
Swar Mandal name is given to this chapter .
The names of seven tones are given in starting .
Then the seven tone-places are mentioned .
Further origin of the each and every tone is being discussed .
It is said that each and every tones is derived from particular live .
Same way some tones are derived from some musical instruments .
Then tone - specialty is described in detail .
It is said that money , cows , friends and sons are found by aiming Sajja and devotee will not be destroyed and he became favorite of women .
Grandeur , post of commander , money , cloths , smell , finery , women and bad are found by Rishabh .
Aimers of Mjjims are capricious , they themselves eat and drink whatever they want and they offer to others .
Expert of Pancham used to be owner of the earth and lots of brave fighters keep on walking on their will .
Experts of Dhevat use to be fowler , trapper , pig man and quarrelsome like fishermen .
It is said that seven tones were originated from the navel circle , origin of tone and weep is same .
Generally , the respirations used to done while reciting any Shloka is the age of it .
It is said about the size of the song that that should be slow at starting , high in middle and light at the end .
It is said that you should kept away yourself from six evils while singing .
Generally , music has eight merits .
Outline of musicology given in the chapter named swar-mandal of Sthanang , are less similar with Natyashashtra by Bharat .
The specific terms which are related to the Musicology , have more less uniformity among them .
But somewhere they are used in the other meaning .
Words such as tone , gram , murchana are common in Natya-Shashtra like Sthanang .
But even of the similarity of Sapt Swara , a large difference in the size and nature of Gram and Murchana .
The vivid description of tone-specialty is not occurred in Natya-Shashtra .
It is said in the definition that Swara is originated from accurate inclusion of Shruti , Gram and Murchana .
There is no similarities in the names of murchana .
In this situation this is possible that collection of Sthanag was occur in any other provinces well before creation of Natya-Shashtra .
Yantra-Sangeet is originated for making Kanth music live and filling inspiration in human heart .
Prakrit texts reveal that variou types of musical instruments were invented in our country in ancient age .
Problem is that that nowadays most of these musical instruments are not used .
It is a guess that in course of time they disapeared .
In this situation , it is not possible to confer any hindi synonym to all musical instruments .
From the perspective totality numbers of musical instruments given in Rajprashniy , that is probably authentic .
A detail list of the sounds of particular musical instruments , which should not be listened to Brahmcharis , is given in Prashn Vyakara Sutra .
It is said in the context in description of Devlok in Sthanag that musical bands use to be play always there .
One list is available in Bhagwati Sutra .
Several such musical instruments are in it , whose names are not mention above .
Similarly , in Aacharang Sutra male and female saints of Shramans are restricted from going to such places where musical instruments are played .
Musical Instruments are divided in four sections in Sthanang Sutra .
In the context of description of Aatodya Lakshan Bharat mentioned four sections of musical instruments .
This is a subject of metioning here that name of made musical instruments such as Dhol , Mridanga is spread in Sthanang Sutra but Bharat has refined these .
While thinking on aim of dance in Nritya Prayojanam chapter , Bharat Muni did not specialy stressed on the aspects of clearing meaning of lyrics and dialogues and making it accordingly .
Thus he praised it from the perspective of its power of increasing grace , goodwill and being a means of entertainment .
32 types of drama methods were mention several times in Bhagawat sutra , but nowhere described in detail .
Ten types of drama were discussed in the chapter namely Natya-Lakshan of Natya-Shashtra by Bharat .
Ihamrig is the name of one of among these .
Analyzing this in detail Bharat writes generally god-goddess use to be characters of dramas of this category .
Yudh-Vigrah is included in it for owning some goddess .
Scenes of kidnapping or luring of goddess used to be .
Men are also murdered .
At last , peace is established .
It seems from particulars given above that Bharat Muni has only discussed required specialty of story section of the drama of catagory of Ihamriga .
But Drama is not meant to the play which is performed in theater but a dance .
Fortunately the complete list is available in Rajprashniya .
In those day god Mahavir was stayed in Amb-shalvan Chaitya near Aamalkappanagar .
One day at evening after the ending of Parishad Suryabha Dev with the group of Devkumars and Devkumaris started performance of dancing-art for entertainment of the god .
In this context , a complete list of 32 types drama-methods is presented .
At the last , Devkumars and Devkumaris together performed main events of before the birth of god Mahavir -LRB- when he was king Nand -RRB- and present life .
Name of this play was ` Bhagavan-Charitra ` .
In the case of Solo dance , dancer get the win by showing Bhav and Thavan etc .
But in group dance mutual collaboration and uniformity of body movement are a large necessity .
Shapes could be created in group dance only .
Much stress is not given on group dance in Natya-Shashtra by Bharat .
More stress is given on individual dance , method of acting , song and vocal in that text .
In this situation , there are great difference between drama methods mentioned in Rajprashniya and methods given in Natya-Shashtra by Bharat .
Obviously , terminologies mentioned here and there in both are common .
For example various names of Swastiks are given in Natyashashtra bu they are not similar with name found in Rajprashniy .
It seems that space of dance by many people together in a dance named Chitrabhinay mentioned in Natyashashtra .
Shaktashy name is also common .
But a large difference is there between both in term of work .
At the last saying it will not be irrelevant that analyzing ` Nritya ` and ` Nritt ` ancient Aachary stated that `` Nritya `` is the name of movement of body parts in accordance of sound and rhythm .
On the other hand , `` Nritt `` is the name of a art which produce same feeling in the heart of audience while expressing its feeling of heart by acting in accordance with sound and rhythm .
Nowadays somewhere it is named ` Nraty-Natya ` .
According to tradition in Acharandsutra Jain saints are restricted from going at such places where plays are use to performed or dance etc . use to performed .
About four types of plays is said in Sthanang .
Vivid description of those is not occurred in Sthanang .
Some explanation is occurred of these in Raj Prashniya .
Gods performed play on the ocassion of Indrabhishek of Sun god .
Moving forward , four types of acting-arts mentioned .
It is not irrelevant to say that Bharat Muni mentioned Samavakaar , Ihamrig , Dim Vyayog , Utsrishtikak , etc ten type of plays in Natyashashtra .
It is a matter of sad that the copy of Natyashashtra which is with the writer , apart from `` Bhan `` not other name is found in it .
Bharat Ji has mentioned four methods of acting .
In order their names are Angik , Vachik , Aharya and Satvik .
Thus , there is a big difference in Rajprashniya and Natya-Shashtra .
Ban has been imposed for entering in painting gallaries on the female saints in Vinay Pittak .
It is said in Jataka texts that Osadhi Kumar had build a huge Krida-shala by collecting fund of one Kahapana from his friends .
He got painted beatiful pictures by painters on it ` s wall .
Similarly , pictures were also painted in the palace of Megh Kumar .
It is said about Malldinn , king of the Videh state that he had build a `` chittsabha `` in which 84 position described in Kokshashtra were engraved .
In this context it said about specialty of a painter that he was so expert in his skill that seeing any one part of anyone 's ` body , he can make her complete idol .
One day while working in painting room , he saw a thumb of Malli Kunwari , elder sister of Malldin Kumar from gap beneath curtains .
With help of his transparency he had made a complete statue of her .
Ruler was very angry with him on this issue and got him exile from the country .
Being sad poor guy went to Kuru state .
Ruler of there was fascinated after seeing the picture and he attacked on Videh state to get Rajkumari .
Painting was widespread popular in ancient age .
By huge crowd used to gather in painting rooms , it is reveals that this art was popular .
Some artists had gained major superiority in this art .
Some theories associated with this fine art began to compose .
Members of the elite who usually spent their life in idleness .
They used to do regular exercise etc . to keep the physical body healthy and active .
The sports ground used to be for boys-girls in cities , assembling there they experienced pleasure of socialisation .
The far ancient name of all means of entertainment was was `` krida `` .
Maharshi Panini has commonly named `` Krida `` of means of entertainment such as wrestling , arms performance , hunting , gambling , garden-trip and dance-songs .
In this way , wrestling named Mallkrida , arms performance named Praharana Krida , gambling named Dyut Krida etc . during Panini age .
Bhas gave `` Krida `` name to a dance namely Hallisak in Balcharit Natak .
Therefore , `` Krida `` and `` Vihar `` are synonym words and meaning of both is means of entertainment .
It is a characteristic of this age that apart from the area of religious literature in Sanskrit language folk literature various texts created and collected in these days .
On the other side Panini wrote Ashthadhyayi in the field of folk literature and scholars such as Patnjali and Katyayan wrote its commentary .
Apart from these Arthshashtra by Kautilya , Kam-Shashtra by Vatsyayan and Natyashashtra by Bharat created in these days .
Supremely , Bhas and Kalidasa wrote their legend plays in these days , live glimpse of folk-life is found in these .
In this section of Sanskrit Literature Ashwghosh is considered pioneer .
Some people say that Ashvaghosh was also inspiration for Kalidas .
In fact , we are amazed to see the variety of entertainment of this period .
These can be broadly divided into two parts - public and local .
Hunting , water-play , Gandharv , drama , garden trip etc . were public means of entertainments .
For example , water-play is being discussed .
Apart from the public means of entertainment some means were local .
Such kind of means of entertainment were dependent on geographical situation of the surroundings .
As in the case of Van-Vihar in forest land , there was a custom of going into internal part of the dense forest .
Hunting is considered a kind of exercise in Ramayana .
It is said in this context that hunters used to do wait on the bank of river in the night .
It is said on a place that in ancient age the king used to go to the hunt for getting meat and leather .
Thus Ramchandraji is desperate for hunting with freedom .
Hunting trip of the king Dushyant is vividly described in Mahabharata .
Shantnu restricted killing of deer , pigs and birds in the name of hunting .
That 's why his ruling-period was praised by saying `` Brahdharmottar `` or Non-violent .
In the same text indirectly some rules related to the hunt is mentioned , which are interesting .
It is said that directly and creating Maya killing of animal is valid , when animal is inattentive can be killed .
Again , if one hunter decided to hunt a particular animal , no one other hunter could attack on that etc .
It is said about Sumitra the king of Haihay dynasty that he targeted a deer by arrow , but that escaped .
King started running after it with Amatya and seraglio .
It is said in Anushashan Parva that Kshatriy are not condemned by eating meat earned by power .
Till then someone is not reached at the level of animal forgetting its own personality , hunting is not possible .
In this situation either hunter kills animal or animal kill hunter .
Therefore , all kings enjoy hunting .
It is known through human theology that people used to keep hunting dog for hunting .
God Manu refers that food should not be eaten at the place of such people .
Greek ambassador Megasthanese has vividly described Mrigya-Yatra of Moryan king Chandragupta .
He says that the ruler occasionally used to come out of the palace for hunting .
Glut of pageantry used to be in his journey .
Women used to sorrround the king .
Out of the circle Chobdar people used to walk carring javelin .
From his stage king used to hunt animal , those forcefully bought inside the circle .
While shooting in the open area he used to take ride of elephant .
Then armed women used to walk with the king taking ride on chords , horses and elephants .
It is memorable here that Kautilya directed that protected forest should be kept to hunting for rulers .
Nails and teeth used to be removed of violent animals that live in such forests .
Description of hunting-trip of king of Sinhal Vikrambetal found in Uttarkhanda of Padmpuran .
Shauryvarma the ruler of Kashmir sent two butches as gift to king .
One day betting with princes Vikrambetal went to hunting .
Running quickly rabbit hid in a bush .
It is said in the Srishthi Khand of same Purana that a king namely Prabhajan targeted arrow on a deer from distance .
That time she was breastfeeding incautiously .
On this , that deer cursed king that because of breaking rules of hunting you will have to be tiger in next life .
Kalidasa in Raghuvansha and Shakuntala praised the custom of hunting from the perspective of physical exercise .
Different dress -LRB- Mrigya-Vesham -RRB- used to be for hunting .
A tail used to tie by wrapping hair of head and a small crown made of flowers and embroidery used to place on the top .
Colour of the dress used to be resembling with the color of leaves .
Greek women used to be there for protecting king ` s body .
They used to wear garland and take bow in hand .
Vivid analysis is made on the results of the hunting Dashkumarcharit .
It has been said that wonderful exercise for the legs is done by this .
Introduction to the animal psychology happens .
Convenience in transport occurs by abolition of the wolves and lions .
Introduction happens with forest and hilly provinces and familiarity happens with forest tribes .
Before concluding this chapter , giving description of custom of capturing wild elephant in fourth century AD will not be irrelevant .
Most important thing is that this description is given by Greek ambassador Magasthnise , who had seen this process live .
Even till now in some parts of Assam and Mysore , a custom of `` Kheda `` is prevalent for capturing wild elephants , means they are bring together by force .
to catch wild elephants , at first a long wide land surrounded by bush-forests used to be chosen .
Arrian says that this land is so wide that a military camp could be established inside this .
A deep trench used to be dug around this land .
A pile of dug soil used to make in the both side of trench .
Small huts used to make by removing soil in the midst of pile for living of guards .
Gates of the huts used to be towards trench .
Only one bridge used to be there for in-out from the circle .
It always kept hidden by the straws , twig and leaves .
After preparation 3-4 female elephants used to leave inside the circle .
After getting news of advent of female elephants , all male elephants of nearby start roaming around the circle in late night .
They did not abruptly dare to enter inside the circle .
Other side , guards used watch activities of wild elephants from their huts .
After roaming outside of the circle for many days , they used to enter in the circle one by one .
As entered in the circle of the group , guard used to remove pool .
In initial condition food material not used to provide to wild elephants .
This way , after few days when they used to be weak , then a fighter and carefree elephant used to leave inside the circle .
As reaching there he used to start fight with strange elephant and effortlessly he used to defeat hungry wild elephants .
In the time of such risk some skilled mahavats used to tie feet of the elephants by while crawling on stomach .
He used to hard try to untie but pet elephants used to injure him by beating .
Solution - when they used to be battered , some food material used to be given them .
One by one they used to bring in elephant house tied with pet elephants .
Nurturing and training etc . of them used to be there .
Malla-Yuddha or wrestling is a indefectible means of pacify war-gluttony rest in our heart .
Along with physical power practical knowledge of machinations is also necessary in it .
Malla-Kirda or wrestling is considered an excellent means of amusement since ancient age .
Moving further , alacrity requires on the part of both opponents .
All know that Pandava had passed Agyatvas period living in the Virat Nagar the capital of Matsya Desh .
While they were there , Brahmotsav was celebrated with ceremony in Asadh -LRB- Mase Chaturth -RRB- .
Specialty of this festival was that a wrestling competition used to be there in this context , in which famous wrestler used to come to participated in it .
This time also gathering of wrestlers was there in context of this festival .
A wrestler namely Jeemut was one of among , no one can confront him .
Thus , he became boastful .
He has also reached there for participate in wrestling and he put challenge to all present wrestlers .
But no one had the courage to fight him .
In this situation , after repeatedly asking by king Virat Bhim , who was working there as cook those days , agreed to contest with Jeetmut .
After entering in Akhara , Bhim checked his dress etc .
Then he loudly challenged Zimut .
The characteristic of this Malla-Yuddha was that arms were not used at all in it .
scuffle was started in initial condition .
In between sound of word Chapetane was also became loud .
When one tried to catch another ` s part , other quickly made it free .
Whenever any part of one collides with any part of other , instantaneously one hits at another .
Some time one started hitting another ` s body while make him lying on ground .
Some time one started rotate other by rotating others ` parts .
Pachad , Mukkebaji , Jhapad , Nakhun , Late were frequently used in this war .
Sometime sound of colliding thighs and heads used to be there .
The audience used to enjoy seeing skill and expressing their attitude by shouting .
Some time they used to drag each-other by hitting by thighs , lift-up , rotating all around , then slam .
Both competitors also reviled each other while fighting .
Ultimately , Bhima suddenly lifted up Zimut with his both stong hands .
Outcome of this process was that Jeemut dead in small duration of time .
Audiences were looking at use of skill of both fighters patiently .
In between people used to praise screamingly and express their feeling .
After some time king Kans has ordered master of Turahi and Mridang of silence by moving left hand .
Like this god Krishna kept on cheating Chanur .
Immediately , Chanur was dead and his dead body lying on the ground .
After death of Chanur , god Krishna had to confront another wrestler namely Toshlak .
But after cheating for a little period god lift up him by both of his hand and started rotating him .
Solution - After slamming him on ground they started hitting him .
As a result , bleeding started from the mouth of wrestler and in a little period he departed from this world .
Meanwhile Balram ji killed Mushtik .
Seeing the alacrity of Ram-Krishna Kansa ` s senses gave up .
With shiver of anger he ordered expulsion of both brothers from Samajvat and jail of Vasudev , Nand etc .
But even before following of his order , god Krishna suddenly attacked on the atrocious ruler .
Somewhat distorted description of the event is given in Jataka texts .
It is said in Ghat Jataka that Devgbba and Upsagar had ten sons .
Baldev was middle and Vasudev was firstborn .
Kansa had already been told that you will be killed by the hand of the sons of Devgbbha .
Thus Devgabbha exchanged son as he born with the new born girl of a client Nand Gop and communicated to Kans that I gave birth to a daughter .
This way she kept on cheating his brother all the ten times .
In the course of time , when all the ten sons of Devgabbha gwron-up , they began to make a big fuss around .
As detected , Kansa decided to put them to kill .
It is said in this context that he thought of organising a big wrestling competition and kept prepared two wrestlers Chanur and Mushtik by teaching .
On fixed day , gallery prepared , it was decorated in a unique manner and victory flag raised .
Gallery , stage , posture etc . were putted for seating of audience .
As received order from the king Kansa Chanur and Mushtir entered in wrestling ground , started jumping while being prepared and shouted intermittently .
In an order , in beautiful dress and having garlands Baldev and Vasudev along with their all brothers reached at theater .
Malla-Yuddha has started as they reached there .
But Baldev killed both Chanur and Mushtik .
Padm Purana and Skandpurana suggest that in the morning of next day to diwali , Bali-Pratipada , Apart from the animal-war wrestling should be performed and king should award to winner .
It is said in Patal Khand of Padmpurana that as receiving news of Ramchandra Ji ` s Ayodhya return , Bharat Ji has ordered citizens to celebrate joy .
It is said in this context that they asked brave fighters to show `` Krida-Yuddha `` .
In Panini age , competetion used to be occur of Mushti-Yuddha and rod .
These were also considered a type game .
Panini gave name of `` Praharana-Krida `` to these means of entertainment .
`` Mushti-Yuddha `` and `` Dand-Yuddh `` are also mentioned in Brahmjal Sutra of Dirgh Nikay .
The exam was taken of students after learning education in our country during ancient age .
Saying this would not be irrelevant in this context that importance of examination was not so much in those days , as it is seen in modern age .
It is said in Vinay Patak that when Jivak learned medical science in Taxila , he asked permission to go home from master .
But that time Guru Ji took his test , then ordered to return home .
Perhaps the examination was conducted organising debate .
In the course of time , when teaching of arm education of Kuru and Pandava princes completed , then teacher Drona decided to take their examination .
The examination was taken in front of everyone .
Therefore , huge crowd gathered at the ground to see skills of princes .
Galleries were decided for sitting of people and different place were decided for ruling class and women .
In a while the whole theater was chock-full with curious audiences .
Even not a small space was left empty .
At the appointed time Guru Dronacharya came and stand with his son in the arena .
After Manglik workers some worker reached there with decoration material .
Then after Yudhishthir remaining 104 brother entered into arena in order of age .
Costume of the all was similar .
As princes reached there , performance of their arms skill started .
In initial condition , miracles were shown in order to target the goal .
Then they showed vaious sport-spectacles with the bow-arrow .
When they were lying on lush green grass and women of seraglio giving entertainment to the prince , a Brahmin Sabhapitakhyayi came to meet prince .
The conversation was even on , a demon namely Saudas Kalmashpad entered in the garden .
Seeing he all started running here and there and all ruined .
Divyavadhad says that one day in spring - season emperor Ashok was gone to a garden located in the east of capital in order to Udyan-Yatra with women of Seraglio .
Seeing a tree flourish with red flower Ashok thought that a why should a inanimate tree popularize in the world with my name .
Women used to keep distance from Ashok because of his dry skin .
When king was taking nap in the afternoon , women plucked its flower and leaves and thrown in order to express their feeling towards him .
When king woke up , he was upset seeing bad condition of that tree and those women were immediately incinerate .
It is known from Markandey Puran that one day king Sudev with his friend Nal -LRB- son of Dhumrashv -RRB- went in some garden for entertainment in spring-season .
After finishing dinner etc . both of friends began to walk along the pond .
Such a time Nal has seen wife of Pramati , son of saint Chyavan .
That time she had came there for fetch water .
The above incidents were associated with princely states .
Due to association with elite class , folk-life could not be traced with those examples .
Glut of treatment , rituals and plausibility in the themes related to princely states .
Thus , they are less live .
The method in which people used to feel variety of Udyan-Yatra , live description of this is done in Kamasutra by Vatsyayan .
In dawn citizens should go for Udyan-Yatra riding on horse with servants .
They should pass whole day there .
For entertainment they should see fighting of cocks , partridge , play gamble , see plays and be with women .
Then , as sun is setting they should return to home taking remains of Udyan-Yatra with them .
In the context of garden-trip , there should also be Pan-Goshthi .
There was also a custom of playing games such as , people in Udyan-Yatra used to be divided in two parts and tried to hit flowers at each other .
In ancient times , perhaps with the intention of destroying the old enmity Van-Vihar was an excuse .
`` Ghosh-Yatra `` narrated in Mahabharata was a such kind of incident .
Karna and Shakuni explained to king Dhritrashtra with cheating that we are going on trip to Dvait Van for inquiry of cow and hunt .
But irritating Pandavas was their main goal .
As received order from the king Dhritrashtra departed from Hastinapur with military , queens , citizens etc .
On reaching Dvait Van they took care of cow , buffalo , goat etc. , stamped new animals and old were calculated .
Cowherds of there welcomed Duryodhan with celebration .
Gopikas showed dance and listened to songs and managed food etc .
Soldier and civilian roamed hunting arbitrarily .
Step by step group crossed forests and gardens and moved on towards pond located in Dvait Van .
Duryodhan gave permission to make tent on the bank of pool .
Unfortunately at the same time Pandavas were also camping in the same area .
Again , same time king of Gandharva Chitrasen havin Jal-Krida in that pond with nymphs .
When servants of Duryodhan wants them evacuate forcibly , fight has been started .
Great fighters like Duryodhan , Karn , Shakuni etc . defeated in the war .
In the last , king of Gandharva wants to abduct Duryodhan and women of his seraglio , Bhim and Arjun stopped him on the direction of Yudhisthir .
But at this time Gandharhwaraj had to disgrace .
Then Duryodhana etc . were released .
Vihar-Yatra name is given to city of Paridarshan of Kumar Shakya Singh in Buddh Charit by Ashwghosh .
Further , King was gone to Van-Vihar before meeting took place with saint Shraman .
They became kind while seeing farmers ` brutal behavior with bullocks and destruction of innumerable lives through plow .
In the end poet says in the context of Mahabhinishkraman that when citizens stopped going into gardens in separation from Kumar , then they started look like forest .
How Kuru-Pandavas had done Jal-Vihar in Ganga river in childhood , Its detail description is occurred in Mahabharata .
Similarly , in later age methods of Jal-Krida of main Yadavs like Balram , Shrikrishna described in Harivansh .
It is not irrelevant to say that Yadav people residents of Dwaraka usually used to Jal-Keli for entertainment .
Harivansa says that once Yadu was taking joy with Jal-Keli with his family in the sea .
In such situation suddenly Nagraj forcefully took away Yadu .
It is said about Satyabhabha that in conversation she used to keep on memorizing god Krishna about incidents related to Jal-Keli in the sea .
Apart from this , methods of Jal-Krida used by Balram Ji , Shrikrishna Ji and main Vrishniys nearby Pindark piligrimage , its detail description found in this text .
Balram ji was doing Jal-Keli with Revati Devi alone , it means Kamjayi Shrikrishna himself used to do entertainment of 16000 women .
Specialty of this is that each and every woman felt that god did not love other then themselves .
Attention of all was centered on the god .
In the context of Jal-Krida , Jal-Yantra or water gun was being used and there was also a tradition of Jal-Yuddha .
Again some people used to do joy by ferries with boats .
Some Yadav of elite class were doing Jal-Keli on the some distance .
Women were with them also .
They were dancing and singing .
On seeing this god called up main nymphs Pach-Chuda , Kanveri , Mahendri etc .
They created various Rasa in the heart of audiences by showing various unique activities related to water .
After completion of Jal-Krida , Yadavs entered into Pan-Bhumi wearing garment-jewelry etc .
All participated in group dance there after having food .
Vatsyayan in Kamasutra has also mentioned the custom of Jalkrida in the context of Udyan-Yatra dunring summer .
In the context Yuthishthir says that I will become courtier of the king while mentioning myself expert of Aksh-Krida .
Further whatever Yuthishthir says , reveals that dices were made of elephants teeth , dices were used to be of red , white , green and yellow color in those days .
A wooden made scale used to be there , on which various blocks were made , dices used to roll and dices were used to increased-decreased according to turn .
In brief , this play usually resembled with Chausar or Chaupad of modern age .
Infact , popularity of Aksh-Krida was so high that Harivash states that even Yadav women used to play Chausar for entertainment .
In the same text name of a game Gol-Krida is mentioned .
Commentator states that `` Gol-Krida `` is a sort of gambling in which spherical dices used to be exercise .
Even after being a popular means of entertainment , god Manu extensively criticised Dyut-Krida .
Kautilya has maintained control of the nation on gambling .
His instruction is that there should be a separate inspector to watch over Dyut-Krida .
Gambling should be played only in government gambling houses .
Fine should be imposed on those who play elsewhere .
Head and Sabhik should provide dice etc on nominal rent .
Similarly nominal fee should take for providing water etc . and permission of game .
Then , he should recover five rupees per hundred from the winner .
Along with he should keep an eye on activities such as sell and bound money etc .
fine sould be imposed on cheaters and rascals .
Yagyavalkya was also in favor of giving more power to Dyutadhyaksha and Sabhik .
It is his direction that when result of turn remain below hundred , then Sabhik should take its 1 part as royal tax and if result is above hundred , then he should collect 1 part .
He should provide rupees to winner by collection from looser .
This is mentionable subject here that rules etc . given in Agnipurana mostly based on Yagyavalkya .
It proven from above description that Sabhik also used to a state officer and looser gamlers came under his control .
Sometimes force use of force also needs to apply in order to provide winning cash to winner .
On thinking from this perspective abuse and activities of Sabhik in plays Charudatta and Shudrak by Bhas seems completely natural .
Actually those who are not familiar with duties of Sabhik ` s of ancient-age , felt this think as problematic .
Some stories comes in view as direction of spreaders and popularity of Dyut-Krida in Patalkhand of Padmpurana .
Kaldasa said in Raghuvansh while describing Swaymvar of Indumati that for passing the time few kings were rolling dices with glowing gemmy rings .
25 parts of Dyut-Krida are occurred mention in Dashkumar-Charit .
Along with merit of the gambling are also narrated .
It said players do not over exited in victory and do not feel depress in defeat .
This Krida make players stiff-necked , which is base of humanity .
Intelligence develops by inspecting power and hand skill of other players etc .
Then Bihar Bhadra explaining to Avanti Varma in the context that gambling makes people attentive and focused .
Prevailence and popularity of the Dyut Kirda remained as it was earlier .
As time has been passed , Dyut-Kridas of various types kept on invented .
Method of play mostely like Chausar of modern age .
Sabhik ` s duty was serious , thus sometimes he had to do rude behave with looser .
Some amount of winning money gone to the nation .
In our country magic or Indrajal is being used since long time for cheating enemy in the field of politics or winning war and as a means of entertainment .
We find `` Maya `` as name of magic in the vedic literature .
Simple meaning of `` Maya `` is illusion .
In other words meaning of Maya is that the thing which is not exists in real , which is totally myth , considering that as exsting and real .
Thus , basically Maya is created to cheat others .
Probably , non-aryan tribes were expert in this skill in primitive age .
It is said about demons that they used fly all around being bird and sometime they used to roam here and there being owl .
But trick did not last long by non-Aryans .
Followingly , Aryans also adopted this skill and they started use of it whenever war outbreaks .
While praising god Indra , it is said in Rigveda that creating Maya he killed expert of Maya Shushna .
It is said above that apart from the usage in battlefield , probably Maya is also used as means of entertainment in Vedic-age .
Such magician who putted audience into illusion creating Maya , they are given name `` Yatudhan `` in Rigveda .
Same were given name of `` Yatuman `` in Awesta .
In course of time , effect of witchcraft increased so much .
It 's proof , profoundly found in texts like Atharvveda , Samvidhan Brahman .
Ramayan states that demons frequently used to exercise Maya for cheating enemies .
It is said about Surpanakha that despite being ugly demon she expressed her love towards Ram and Laxam turn by turn by becoming beautiful woman .
Marich lured Sita Ji becoming Swarn-Mrig .
Megnad proudly killed illusive Sita in the battle ground .
Many examples found of political use of Maya or Magic in Arthshashtra by Kautilya .
Kautilya gave name `` Jambhak-Vidya `` to Magic .
Kautily suggested in Jambhak vidya of taking work of skilled spy for abduct king by luring or murder them and making Rajas ` minister or Amatya cheater .
Spy used to become ghost by wearing skin of bear and spread continuous smoke from mouth .
Oil and Abarak used to paint on idols of god to aiming spread fear among simple believer people .
Because of this idol would not burn even set it on fire .
Kautilya has given many tips in the last chapter of Arthshastra .
But problem is that name of many such tree-plants mentioned in it , with whom we are not familiar .
Mixture of astringent oil with shattered glow-worm shines in night .
There is a custom binding a stick in the tail of big bird like swan , Karankul , peacock to show meteor .
To spread continuous smoke from the mouth a ball of Pilu or origin of Alasi and fire used to keep wrapping cotton and threads .
It keeps on burning even in water on fire spreading oil in the froth of sea .
Similarly , fire set into the bone of monkey and bamboo of mixed color , do not distinguish even in water .
Putting blood of owl and vulture on shoes made with skin of camel , these should wrap with leaves of Peepal .
One wouldn ` t feel tired even after the walk of 50 Yojan by usage of such shoes .
Apart from various educations related to arms Maharshi Valmiki had also taught Gandharva Vidya and Jalandhari Vidya to Lova and Kusha .
Detail description of these educations is not occurred anywhere in Purana .
But it will not wrong to guess that probably this would be related to Indrajal .
Kriyayogsar Khand of Padmpuran says that princess Sulochana reached in the court of king Sushesh by becoming men due to impact of Vidya .
Those day Sulochana kept her name Virvar .
In this situation , he had married princess Jayanti devi by killing a giant rhinoceros .
It is stated in Vishnu Purana that while fighting war Pradumn impressed `` Saptmi Maya `` used by demon king Shambar by `` Ashtami Maya `` .
It is said in Awanti-Khand of Skandpuran that the whole world could be covered with darkness by effect of Maya .
Again it stated in Prabas-Khand of same Purana that when Ruru demon was fighting with Devi , he used this Maya .
But nothing worked out in the front of Devi Ji .
Ultimately Devi Ji defeated and threw Ruru into the sea .
When god Shiva was fighting with demon Jalandhar , then demon used this Maya to control god .
Hundreds of Gandharvas and Apsaras came into battle ground and started dancing and singing dut to effect of the Maya .
Their dances were so interesting that god Shankara left lokking at them for a long a period .
Apart from Indrajal vidya usage in battleground for cheating enemy this Vidya was also used for entertainment of curious audience .
Detail description of Aindrajalik skills of Savaran Sidhi done in Ratnavali Natika .
When queen Vasavdatta realized that her husband Vatsraj Udayan is in love with a orphan refugee , then she feels irritated .
Solution - Rani has closed that orphan in a isolated room of serglio while locking her hands-feet .
Amatya Yaugandhnrayana sent a skilled magician to liberate him .
He was cheerful and keeping Chanwar in the hand .
On receiving order from king he showed many gods in sky handling Chanvar .
Then many Sidh-Chanran started dance with goddess in the sky .
At the end , Magician put fire in a section of royal-building creating Maya .
Aghast king entered into burning palace to save so called Sagarika .
Seeing that magician suddenly extinguished the fire .
So called Sagrika was revealed as real sister of Vasavdatta .
Due to goal of making his master greater king Yaugandhnarayan wanted to him marry with Ratnavali .
Finally , the Queen married her sister Ratnavali to Udayan with great love .
In our country puppet show has been an old and great means of entertainment .
At first , it ` s mention occurred in Mahabharata .
It is stated as a metaphor that human are run by god as puppet tied with strings .
Poet Shri Harsh stated that continuous puppet dance used to happen in entertainment house of Nal and background people used to run puppet while seating behind the wall .
These evidences prove that the dolls dancing in our country was current from Mahabharata .
It has been said above that descendants of Bhrigu Rishi turned out extra-ordinary in the craft of engraving and wooden .
It will not wrong to guess that work of carpenter was not their only livelihood , but they used to do this work for time pass .
Thus , this was their means of entertainment .
Direction is given to citizens in Kamasutra that they should do cotton work or wooden work to pass Leisure time .
It is clearly stated in Kadambari that prince Chandrapid was also taught `` Daru-Karm `` or wooden work along with other skills in Vidya-Mandir .
Engraving is considered a very important part of book writting in Padmacharit .
Nurturing of prince Udayan was occurred in the Ashram of Jamadagni Muni in the forest .
After adolescence one day prince entered in the forest for hunting .
He saw a fowler tightly binding a huge dragon there .
Seeing the scene prince felt mercy and asked him to liberate him .
But hunter didn ` t pay attention to him at all .
`` I will earn money by showing it in the city and village `` , while saying this he locked snake in the basket .
Solution - Kumar liberated him by giving his bracelet .
However swing was less mentioned in Vedic literature though it will not wrong to guess that even in that period usage of swing to make children silent and sleep would have been there .
It is said about god Krishna and Balram Ji in Harivansh and Vishnu Puran that both used to enjoy while swinging on swing in childhood .
Raghuvansh by Kalidasa reveals that a vast room named Leelaghar used to be in royal palaces .
Apart from the Dola various means of entertainments used to be placed there .
It reveals from Malvikagnimitra that generally women used to be fond of swaying on a swing .
Mahadevi Dharni received injury because of a fall from a swing .
Queent Iravati expresses wish to swing sitting with the King .
It is suggested in Purushottam-Mahatmy of Skandpuran that Dolarohan of Govind Ji should celebrate in the ground in front of Jaganath Mandir in Puri on Purnima of Falgun .
It is directed in this context that while celebrating Agnyotsava on the night of Chaturdashi , next day god should be place on swing .
Erotic activities , Shri Krishn had with Gopis in Vrindavan , probably this festival is memorial that .
In is said in Arunachal Mahatmya of the same Purarna that when god Shankar and Devi ji was stayed on Kanakachal , then they used to do `` dola keli `` for entertainment .
Again , Revakhand of the same Purana says tht god Vishnu had created a Maya to kill a demon named Kalprishtha .
He said in this context that seven beautiful women , roaming in Maya kanan were created .
They were singing melodiously while swinging on a swing .
Seeing them demon completely fascinated by the demon .
It is said in Dashkumar-charit that prince Rajvahan has seen two lovers swaying on a swing in some garden .
Kundak-Krida such as Dola-Keli had been very common means of entertainment during ancient age .
This way , physical labor used to be by playing this game .
Occasionally women used to play this game to entice men .
This play was public in ancient India - It means , men-women from all age used to play this game for entertainment .
Nevertheless , most women used to play this game .
Future wife of the king Udayan and real sister of Magadhraj Padmavati is being seen doing Kundak Krida in play Svapnvasavadatta .
It is said in Maheshvar Khand of Skand Purana that Gauri devi generally used to play this game .
It reveals from the Kashikhand of same Puran that quickness is necessary while playing ball and movement of parts is also much more .
Apart from woment , men were also used to actively participate in Kundak Krida .
It is said in Kriyayogsar Khand of Padmpurana that Narayan did friendship with a Brahman Bhadratanu after impressed by his devotion .
Occasionally , both used to play with ball to entertaining .
It is known from Malvikagnimitra that kids were also used to play the ball .
It is said in Raghuvansh that ball used to toss by hitting palm .
This thing authenticated from Bhagwat-Puran .
Dashkumar Charit says that Devi has ordered in dream to princess of Suhm country that she should perform dance with playing ball on the third day of every month .
A huge crowd used to gather at temple to watch dance of the princes .
That ` s why the function named `` Kundotsv `` .
Kamsutra reveals that plat of playing Akarsh used to hang in drawing room of citizens and used to take off on the time of game .
Various blocks used to be on this plat , in which dices were kept according to turn .
Competitor dices were used to defeated on accurate turn .
Katyayan says that such blocks were used made in the upper part of the scale in those days .
The carpet of Choupad game , also have aged block made on its both sides .
But it seems that Akarsh was a game of two human beings .
In contrast to this four players participate in Chouras .
It would not be irrelevant to say that Yashodhar , commentator of Kama-sutra consider Aksh-Krida as synonym of Akarsh-Krida .
The custom in which festival of Shal-bhajika celebrated in Lumbini Udyan by Devis of Shudhhodan , the detail description of this was happened in Jataka texts .
It is said that there was a dense forest of Shal between the cities of Kapilvastu and Devdah .
Residents of both the cities used to travel by this forest .
Goddess used to go to Devdah from Kapilvastu .
Each and every leaf and flower was shivering in the Shal-Van because of influence of spring .
Branch and twig of every tree was bent with the weight of new bloom flowers .
From afar , it seemed that there was redness of the forest fires spread all over the forest .
Seeing such lovely scene Devis could not control themselves and they express desire of play in Shal-Van .
Mahadevi went into that forest with friends .
Solution - When she reached at a stem of good Shal tree , then she extended her hand to keep a twig loaded with flowers .
The twig was automatically bent as the hand of the goddess approaches .
Goddess caught that .
In such condition , she experienced labor pain .
Thousands of people used to pluck flower of Sakhu , dance , sing and play , roam by gathering in the forest of Shal nearby city .
It is estimated that palm trees were attacked in the context of Tal-Bhajika-Krida .
It is said above that these all games were prevalent in eastern province .
The stone engrave works of Sanchi and Baraut , such scenes often come into view .
Commonly it is seen that a woman is plucking flowers from a bent tree .
Even such scenes are not rare in Gandhar Shilp of Kushan-age .
It is specialty of these games that women-men participating in the game used to pluck flower with their hand .
These games were prevalent in various provinces .
Sahkar-Bhanjika - it was related to pluck the blossom of mangos .
Visa-Khadika - It was related to the cutting of scape of lotus .
This game was only possible close to a pond .
Nav-Patrika - when new leaves started emerging on trees of forest after fresh rain then game used to play .
It is memorable that Damankotsav is mentioned in many Puranas .
Skad-Purana states that at first king Kushdhvaj has started this festival in the honor of Shiv ji in Kashi .
This festival used to celebrated on the Shukla Chaturdashi of Chaitra .
That day idol of Shiva used to place on swing made of gold .
Probably , idol of god Shiva used to be decorated with flowers of Damnak on this occasion .
Damnakhya Navami is mentioned in Garuda-Puran .
This festival used to be celebrated on Shukla Navami of Chaitra and there was custom of worship of goddess Durga .
Kumkum Krida - it is indirectly mentioned at first in Uttar Khanda of Padmpuran .
It is said in the praise of Kashmir Mandal that there is so much production of saffron that even redness in sun and moon comes from saffron powder spread in the ground of home during morning .
It is said in the context of celebrating Madanotsav in Ratnavali Natika that citizens have colored the whole city with yellow color by the powder of Kumkum , apart from playing with color .
Again in the Samyvar of Devayanti , her friend mentions Kumkum Krida while introducing Kashmir state .
Vatsyayan has ordered that occasionally citizen should gather while organising festivals etc .
Through this custom they should experience the joy of socialisation .
They can organise Ghata-Nibandh or Dev-Yatra .
A journey or procession named `` Kamdevanuyan `` thus mentioned in the play Charudatt by Bhas .
According to the description of the play , a huge peoples ` march taking the potrait of Kamdev with bands was organised .
It is memorable here that Vasant Sena has take shelter at the home of hero of the play Charudatt after irritating chasing of king shyalak .
Similarly , It is said in Avadan Shatak that a custom of celebrate a festival named Nagar Parv used to be in Kashi every year during ancient time .
That day whole city used to be decorated and rulers also used to participate in such festivals with interest .
It is memorable here that a custom of celebrate Nagar-Parv with ceremony was in the old greece .
Apart from the procession and celebrating festivals Vatsyayan suggested that event should be orgainised on the particular dates designated for each god in the temple of related god .
Apart from the local artist , the skill artist came from outside should also perform their arts and perform play in such gathering .
On the second day , award should be given to the artist came from outside and they should be stayed to act again .
Expanidture of lounging and food of outsider people should be born by citizen collectively .
Gata-Nibandhan name of above mentioned means of entertainment given because of huge gathering of peoples used to be there in such journey and performances -LRB- Ghata -RRB- and people themselves organised these -LRB- Nibandhan -RRB- .
Goshthi was the name of such gathering used to organise frequently to increase knowledge by give-take of thought .
Description of such a gathering occurred in Dashkumar-Charit , where Ragmanjari performed songs .
Generally , such gathering was organised at Ganikalay , Sabhamandap and rich citizen ` s place .
In such meetings debates used to take place on issues such as literature , art , song-dance etc and award used to be given to skilled artist and literary person .
Pan-Goshthi - Such meetings were used to be according to the order at citizens ` house .
Nagar-Shobhaen used to be present in such meetings .
Various types of wines used to be drunk with various snakes there .
Occasionlly , such meetings were organised in the context of Udyan-Yatra .
Such festivals and games , which used to be celebrated with huge gathering of people , Vatsyayan named these as Samasya-Krida .
In this context some games were found in Kamasutra .
There was a custom of playing gambling on the Kartik Amavashya and having fun with night vigil in the honor of Yakshs .
Possibly , this very festival named Diwali in the course of time .
There was a custom of night vigil on the night of Purnima by swinging on swing of playing gamble .
Suvasantak or Madanotsava - this festival used to be celebrated on the fifth date of Shukla of Magh .
While celebrating this preference was given to dance-song , color was used to play and Abir-Gulal used to spray .
Live description of this festival is found in the first section of Ratnavali Natika .
It seems that this festival was public in Kashmir state during nineteenth century .
While celebrating this , people used to forget age , gender and social status .
They used to spread Pishthatak -LRB- Haldi , Chaval and Kumkum powder -RRB- on each other and play color whil wrapping Gajara on head .
Young women used to hug each other while singing and usage abusive language while playing gambling .
Apart from these , some name of games prevalent in various countries found in the Kamasutra .
There was a custom of playing Dhuledi with scented stick of oat on the Shukla Chaturthi of Vaishakha .
This festival mostly celebrated in the western provinces .
There was a custom of swinging on swing on third of Shukla of Savan .
It is opinion of Acharya of ancient age that if some boy used to play such games with some familiar girl , naturally girl will incline with him .
After being mature she will marry same boy .
Mushti-Dyut - a guess on the name and number of thing hidden in fist .
Partner used to try to hold middle fingure of the other player .
But he used to prevent such things by moving fingers .
Six-seven small stones used to toss in the air while putting on palm .
Again they used to catch while reversing the hand .
Player used to run here and there in a second .
Lavan-Vithika - a narrow way used to be between the salt shops .
Whosever player used go through that way leaving his place becomes Lavanhar -LRB- means Lavan is spotted on his body and dress -RRB- .
Godhum-Punjika - various small piles were used to put up with grains like wheat and rupees-paisa used to hide in some piles .
The player who used to choose such pile , which did n't have rupee-paisa , fine used to be collected from them .
Angul-Taditika - Eyes used to make close of one of the players .
Remaining players used to touch her head by finger .
If the player , whom eyes were closed , revealed exact name of toucher , then this became thief .
Description of such few games occurs above , in which both boy-girls could participate .
Many toys useful for children somewhat mentioned in Kamasutra .
At the end , saying this will not be irrelevant that Mrichkatika reveals that giving the carriage made of clay to children to play was also a custom .
Harina-Kridan - apart from Vishnu-Puran this children ` s game mentioned in Bhrahm Puran and Bhagwat Puran .
Thus this is estimated that this game would have been widely popular in the ancient period .
Method of play was as above - two boys used to form a group and go to the target leaping , jumping and running like deer .
The children who first reached at target point , victory used to be considered of him .
Then defeated boys used to roam two rounds from source to the target while carrying victorious child on his shoulder .
Vita-Krida or Gulli Danda - commentator of Mahabharata Nilkantha states that in this play , children players throw away , long away a stick like oat in size from a stick of one yard .
One day when princes of Kuru-Pandava were playing this game outside of Hastinapur , suddenly their Gulli felled in a wall .
Even after hard trying princes were not able to recover that .
Solution - Dron recovered that by targeting through arrow .
After this , Dron started teaching arms ` education to princes .
Chitra-Kridanak - It is said about Satyavan in Mahabharat that in childhood he was fond of horses .
Therefore , he used to make horsed of soil and play by painting horses on the wall when he was living in the forest with parents .
Thus he was named Chitrashva during childhood .
If investigation is done of this all games , it reveals that aim to all was giving experiences of pleasure of socialisation and entertainment .
It is known from some formulas of Panini that initially only three tones - udatt , anudatt and svarit were used during Vedpath .
In the course of time collection of vedand named Shiksha was done , all seven tones were being prevalent .
It is daid in Bhumikhand of Padm Puran that Kul Devata used to be happy after listen to music .
Even god Shankar lands on earth after listen to good music .
All Rasa are found in beautiful songs .
Origin of Srignar etc . Rasa is the music .
Grace of Vedas increases by the help of song .
No doubt in this , Kul-gods can be pleased by music .
God Brahma is the high command of the Uttar etc tones .
God of the rhythm named Uttar Mrid is Dhruv .
Ancestors are the gods of Uttarayan .
After compellation of detail description of Swarmandal , particulars of Gitalankar is given in the mentioned Purana .
Alankar is the name of decorating in suitable character and terms in accurate order .
As humans ` beauty glows on wearing jewelry , similarly prosperity of music increase due to magic of decking .
But decorating it on accurate location is work of the artist .
People will laugh if someone wears Gujari of hands in feet and wrapd Kardhani on head of waist .
Thus singers should sings raga and use decks as per rule on fixed time .
New Swars is made from the mixture of all seven Swaras as per position and order .
Occasionally Matras are remained hidden according to the nature of music .
Again detail description of Rag-Raginis is happened in Nagar Khand or Skand Purana .
It is said that respectable main six Raga are the sons of god Shankara .
Each Raga has six wives .
Great grant father Brahma became originator of these .
Shree Raga is the eldest son of god Shankar .
It was originated from the heart of Aadidev .
Raginis were born from mind of the god .
Thus period of performance was according to the psychology and is based on ever changing mental condition of human .
It was custom of performing plays of Vir Rasa in third Pahar because human heart becomes positive towards such Rasa after finishing morning work and food etc .
It was custom of performing plays of Vir Rasa in third Pahar because human heart becomes positive towards such Rasa after finishing morning work and food etc .
Initially , plays used to be performed in the ground attached with temples -LRB- Natya Mandir -RRB- , in the ground of royal palace and probably in Giriguha -LRB- for example cave of Ramgarh hill -RRB- .
Three kinds of theaters are described in Natyashashtra - rectangle -LRB- Vikrisht -RRB- Quad -LRB- Chaturasra -RRB- and the triangle shape -LRB- Tryasra -RRB- .
The length was not used to be more than 32 yards and wide 16 yards of big theaters .
Not more than 400 audiences can be seated in such theaters .
Three sections used to be of the theater - -LRB- 1 -RRB- backstage and dressing room , where characters used to do make-up , -LRB- 2 -RRB- proscenium , on which play used to staged , and -LRB- 3 -RRB- Gallary , where audience would seat .
The backstage used to be behind proscenium .
Akashvani etc . used to be narrated from there .
4 yards wide used to be of backstage .
Two small daises named Mattvarani use to be in the both sides of the proscenium .
In the all four corner of the every daises one pole and on this a Chhajan used to be there .
Mostly it used to work like `` gate wings `` of nowadays .
According to this idea Mattavarani used to consider a class of theater .
Occasionally actors used to deliver lecture etc while standing on Mattavarani .
Surface of the stage used to be flat like a mirror .
It ` s wide also used to be four yards .
Gallery used to be of 24 yards .
A wall used to be between backstage and stage .
Two gates used to be in this .
Two designer curtains had been hanged on these .
Characters used to enter and exit at stage while removing these curtains .
Unique decoration used to be of the gallery .
To suit wooden made idol of animal-bird and human used to be plac .
Stage used to be for audience seating .
Somewhere theater also used to be double floor .
Windows used to be small , so words and music uttered by actors do not go west because of excess air .
Various types of pictures used to be painted on the wall .
Painted curtains used to not in use like nowadays .
Custom of usage of painted curtains was not prevalent even in England in Shakespeare period .
Therefore , audiences had to be more vigilant and take much more help of imagination for entertainment while seeing and hearing performance of plays of ancient age .
It is said above that painted curtains were not used while performing plays .
To address this lack characters used to try create same feeling in the mind of audiences through the conversation and elegant description .
This trick has been used while description of the scene of Dandkaranya in Uttarramcharit .
Again , use of dresses of various colors and make up used to be done and belief in the art of acting used to be kept for feeling Rasa of the play in the mind of audiences .
Four types of acting mentioned in Natyashashtra - Aangik , Vachik , Aahary and Satvik .
Bharat Muni has described in detail the meaning reveals from the movement of parts of body in a particular method while explaining Angik Abhinaya .
13 varieties are mentioned of head movement and it is also mentioned that which method should be used for head movement to expressing a particular feeling .
Similarly , detail is also given of the Rasas and Bhavas originatein the mind of audiences by movement of eyes with various methods .
All actors know that hands and fingers are mostly used for expression of feeling during performance of play .
Movement of hand and fingers is necessary for theater artists .
If any actor do not do this , audience will say this character perform like a idol made of wood or stone .
Really , Movement of hand and fingers is most necessary for impress audience in the theater .
As like we have to do in everyday life , movement of feet is most useful on the stage .
Movement of whole body use to controlled by feet .
Three types are mentioned of feet movement .
Detail analysis is occurred of issues such as Swara , Sthana , Varna , Kaku , Laya in the description of Vachik Abhinaya .
Suggestion of usage of Udatt and Kampit voice is given at the time of performing of Vir Rasa .
Apart from this a unanimous Abhisamay named Kaksha-Vibhag was on the stage .
On such occasion audiences had to use their imagination to the maximum limit .
In was considered that those actors entering first , they are inside .
It used to think that those who are coming later are outside of the house .
Occasionally , idols of chord , Pushpak Viman , elephants used to show on stage , for example small carriage made from soil used to show in Mrichkatka play .
Same way idol of elephant used to bring on the stage in Udayan Charit .
Relation of Satvik acting is mostly with psychology .
It is said in this context that till then actor did not realized that actually he is the real character whom he is performing , he will not able to impress heart of the audiences .
In other words till then actor is not in aggression , how he can create Bhava and Rasa in the audiences .
Efforts were used to make to established complete co-operation between actor and audiences on the time of performance .
Audience had to use their intellectual and imaginary power at large for enjoy the performance , then only they can enjoy the performance while seeing -LRB- not only listening to -RRB- it .
Ancient Indian theater art had close relationship with psychology .
Mention of play Lakshmi-Svayamvar by Bharat has been done above .
Harivash states that unfamiliar people cann ` t enter into the capital of Vajranabh .
Therefore , main Yadava youngster Pradumn , Samb constituted a theater group initially performed play outside of the capital only .
When audiences praised a lot them , Vajranabh called them in his court .
Seeing their expertness in theater art , Vajranabh organised a Mahakalotsav with ceremony .
It is said in Avdan Shatak that some traveler Nats had performed `` Buddh Natak `` in the royal court .
Budha himself acted as Natyachartya in this .
According to Natyashashtra by Bharat gods had performed Amrit-Manthan and Tripurdah in front of Shiv Ji .
Again it is stated Bhumi Khand of Padmpuran that Vaman-Charit was performed in the court of Yayati .
Kam and Rati participated in it .
It said in appreciation of drama in Malvikagnimitra that drama is the only way to satisfied people with different kind of interest .
The art of the drama used to learn only from talented instructors .
Encouragement used to be provided from nation for development of the fine arts .
When clash was going on between two instructors , request was mad to ruler that he himself held duty of judge .
Raja handed over that duty to Pandita Kaushiki .
Considering all ideas Vishnudharmottar Purana agreed that Drama is the name of imitation of others .
Nrit increases its grace and makes it perfect while shaping it .
It is stated above that apart from the brahmins people of all other varna and caste used to of Surapan in ancient age .
Kumarsambhav by Kalidasa reveals that in those days people considered that due to Surapan prettiness of women increases .
Thus , custom of Surapan started among the women .
Ramayan says that daughter of king Varun Varuni originated in the context of Samudra-Manthan .
When sons of Diti refuse to own her , then sons of Aditi respectfully owned her .
Then gods were named `` Sura `` and demons were `` A-Sura `` .
Imitating gods the custom of Surapan started in human society in the course of the time .
It is known from Sanskrit literature that in various types of wine used to make ancient age .
When Sita ji went to the Jungle with Ramchandra and Laxam , then on the returning well she vowed to pray Ganga by devoting thousand pot wine and Pulav in appropriate quantity .
Apart from these wines a wine named Kailatak Madhu also mentioned in Mahabharata .
It is estimated that this wine was very strong .
Generally wine used to be kept in pots of gold and silver .
Mention of covered wine pots is in Mahabharata .
Detail description was occure of Panshala located in seraglio of Ravana in the Ramayana .
That building decorated with garlands divided into small rooms .
All desirable material was available in these .
Apart from the various types of prepared animal meat , various types of food item were kept there .
Jewellery , stole , Pan-pot , plate and broken garlands were littered on the floor .
Various kinds of Sura and wine were kept there in order .
Rhinestone , cups made of gold and Pan-pot made of silver were also placed there .
Again , cups made of gold , silver and gem were seen all around inside Panshala .
Someone had been filled to capacity with bounce , some were half empty , some were full empty , remaining were not tested by anyone .
Drunk women were either lied on the bed or used to polling and tossing on the floor .
Monkeys were also habitual of drinking .
Roads and streets of Kishkindha used to occupy from the smell of Mairey and Madhu .
Tara Devi drunk heavily before meeting with Laksham Ji , so she had gone beyond hesitation .
Occasionally closed people used to gather for Surapan to experience pleasure of socialisation .
It is known from Kamasutra that occasionally people used to organise a Pangoshthi named `` Samapanak `` for entertainment .
Ganikas were also used to be present in these .
Occasionally , women-men used to enjoy drinking together .
It is said in Ramayana that Hanuman ji had reached Lanka crossing the sea from standing on Mahendra Parvat .
Dashkumarcharit states that Vidarbhraj Avantivarman has organised a Pan-gosthi .
It is said about Uttam son of Uttanpad in Markandey Puran that the king was in love with his wife .
But Devi used to hesitate in return to love of his husband .
She used to remain somehow reserve .
One day , in the night an event was happening in royal-palace with ceremony , dancers were dancing , feudal lord and courtier were present in the meeting .
All were drinking intermittently .
Then the king offered Pan-Patra filled to capacity with wine .
But Devi did not take the cup .
She turned her face away because of the king ` s stubborn .
King irritated with Devi ` s attitude and called guard and ordered him to leave queen in the forest immediately .
It is stated in Vishnupuran that Balram ji used to roam in the forest of Vrindavan with cowboys .
Seeing this god Varun has sent his daughter Varuni to deceive .
As order received , Varuni entered in a hole of a Kadam tree in that forest .
As Varuni seated there , a wine stream started blowing from the hole of tree .
As seeing this view Balram Ji ` s chronic addiction rose again .
He consumed Varuni till satisfaction in the company of close friends and relatives .
In high Intoxication Balram Ji pulled Yamuna river closed to him by his personal valley and then returned to home after taking bath .
On consumption of exotic materials by people is clearly mentioned in the plays and poetry of the Kalidasa .
Devi Indumati used to interestingly consume wine touched at mouth of king Aja .
Victorious soldiers of Raghu had consumed coconut made wine on Mahendra Parvat .
Custom of Surapan with audacity praised in Dashkumarcharit .
It makes drinker generous of heart and increases strength while removing fear and despair .
Administrator of the Pulitzer award Sig Gissler considers that online media will place hard challenge to traditional media in coming days .
Means this is a wind of changes in the journalism , which will change immensely and in future whenever history of the media will be written , this media and this age will be recorded as revolutionary event .
New types of -LRB- social -RRB- media have broken several myths of journalism .
Social sites became new medium of information , the mobile phones are become mobile schools of communication .
Role of ` Darban ` of few journalist or media institute on information ended now .
Reach of new media is amazing .
This is more democratic .
More space for comment , doubt , suggestion is in it .
This is cheap and happening in the reach of common people .
