On the occasion of opening and closing of All India Farmer and Agriculture Industry Exhibition , the release of literature written by the scientists of the university was done by the guests .
Some are either found in natural form like rock phosphate or are in iron factories in the form of extra -LRB- by product -RRB- like basic slag .
The percentage amount of the solubility in water of these different forms is different , so the amount of these available to the plant is also different .
In this way , the effect of phosphorus fertilizer is different on the yield of jowar .
In comparison to the new phosphorus fertilizers , probably super phosphate is considered as the base yardstick .
Dr. Gobil researched and saw that effect of the mixture of triple phosphate and rock phosphate and super phosphate and dicalcium phosphate is found to be same from the point of view of yield of jowar .
It is necessary to have more than 75 percent of water solubility in the mixture of super phosphate and rock phosphate .
As far as possible , for meeting the demand of phosphorus , triple super phosphate only should be used in farming of jowar .
Granular composite fertilizer like urea , ammonium phosphate in the source form of phosphorus , will prove superior to super phosphate .
Ammonium poly phosphate , which is a new fertilizer with nitrogen phosphorus , is also found to be good .
70 percent part of the total potassium stays only in the stover -LRB- stover -RRB- of jowar and in our country every year cutting stover of jowar is used as fodder .
In this way , on consuming of potassium or . the accumulated deposit of potash in the land is reducing day by day .
There is a possibility of the speed of this reduction to increase with the increase in high yielding type and hybrid type of area .
It is possible that in the near future , using of potassium fertilizers will become necessary like nitrogen and phosphorus for taking good yield .
Mahapatra et al -LRB- 1973 -RRB- in the experiments done on farms of the farmers found some increase in the yield of jowar on giving potash .
Use of micro nutritive elements : In these nutritive elements iron and zinc are specially important in the farming of jowar .
Probably , absence of both these micro elements is found in the areas growing jowar .
Deficiency of iron is frequently seen in land with limestone -LRB- calcareous soil -RRB- .
Iron has special importance in the farming of jowar .
In California state of America , in the land deficient with iron , on farming jowar , only 250 kilograms of yield of grains could be got per hector .
But making a 3 percent solution of sulphate and ferrous sulphate with more powerful iron element , on spraying twice on the leaves , the yield increased to 3750 kilograms per hector meaning an increase of 1500 percent happened .
Giving sulphate of iron successfully in a limestone soil is not possible .
So it ` s spraying on the leaves is only considered correct .
It is possible that with the decrease in the amount of limestone , it can be put in the soil as per the local tradition .
From these experiments one more important mystery was unfolded that in types of jowar there is a large difference in the response towards iron .
In our country , the response of hybrid jowar is measured towards iron element and zinc .
In some limestone soils deficiency of these nutritive elements is seen and in some not .
This mystery should be understood through research .
On the basis of this result , the problem of the plants of jowar becoming yellow due to lack of iron can be better understood .
The type of jowar giving promisingly more yield which is used in the work of improvement , growing that on limestone soil , has be to picked so that the type which can tolerate the deficiency of this element can be developed .
The classification of the soil of all the areas of the country has been done based on the micro nutritive elements .
By studying it , the deficiency of the nutritive elements in different parts can be known to a great extent .
The jowar farming areas in which it is told there is deficiency of zinc and iron elements , it can be beneficial to work on this aspect in those areas .
In the main areas of bajra farming most number of farmers is under the poverty line , so use of costly products like compost or fertilizer is beyond their financial reach .
Other than this , the level of inherent capacity of producing of available local types is low and their demand of nutritive elements can be partially fulfilled either by leaving the land uncropped or farming of pulses .
At the Kovilpatti center in Tamil Nadu , the yield of bajra doubled with the use of nitrogen fertilizer .
In the absorption method of the nutritive elements and collection of dry material is almost like the method of jowar .
There is difference only in the method of absorbing potash because bajra needs it more as compared to jowar .
The percentage amount of nitrogen in the leaves keeps increasing till just before the flower comes .
This can be said that from the beginning stage to the flowering stage the process of absorbing nitrogen keeps on increasing continuously but the total amount of nitrogen in the foliage increases similarly in both till the lactiferous stage .
After this stage , any change was not seen in the amount of nitrogen also .
It has to be understood by this that the entire requirement of nitrogen of the growing ear and corn is fulfilled only by the stored nitrogen in the initial stages .
The method of percentage amount of absorbing nitrogen in the roots is same as the stem .
Most amount of nitrogen is in the grain of bajra at the time of harvesting .
The amount of nitrogen found in the life time of a plant of bajra has direct relation with the yield of the grain .
Bajra absorbs nitrogen in the form of nitrate more fast instead of in the form of ammonium .
For it ` s most desired growth , a ratio of 2:1 between nitrate and ammonium is found to be best .
But if the total amount of phosphorus is seen then exactly opposite situation of this is found .
In the stem , the percentage amount of phosphorus is maximum before the flowering stage .
The phosphorus requirement of the entire plant of bajra is from the lactiferous stage till middle stage .
The amount of phosphorus in the leaves , stem , root and grain of bajra slowly goes on decreasing with the growing up from the initial seedling stage .
The speed of this decrease is found to be least in the harvesting stage .
Maximum amount of potassium is found in the stem of the plant of bajra .
The reducing amount of potassium is found serially in the leaves , roots , corn -LRB- in which grains have not formed -RRB- and grains .
The plant of bajra in most of it ` s growing period and in the interval of half-ripe stage , absorbs potassium with continuous speed , meaning no rise-fall has been seen .
In the leaves , in the amount of calcium , till before the flowering stage and in the amount after that no describable change happens .
In the stem , most amount of calcium is found in the stage before the flowering process and after that , till harvesting , it goes on reducing continuously .
In the root , maximum amount of potassium is in the growing period and in the grain in the yield stage .
Most percentage amount of magnesium is accounted in the leaves and grain-less corn at the time of harvesting , in the stem before the flower comes and in the root in the stage of maximum plant growth .
It is natural for the required amount of nitrogen also to be different because the inherent fertility strength of the soil is different .
The experiments that G . C . Munda -LRB- 1974 -RRB- did in the Indian Agricultural Research Institute , New Delhi , to understand the most desired amount of nitrogen for hybrid bajra in the watered stage , on the basis of that , it was found that the effect of amount of nitrogen does not fall on green leaf disease .
But the percentage amount of kandua and ergot afflicted plants increased with the increase in the amount of nitrogen used .
The use of nitrogen fertilizer is useful in local varieties .
The level of yield of these varieties is continuous as compared to hybrid varieties and the amount of response is less .
In hybrid varieties , on infliction of terrible diseases like green leaf -LRB- romil phaphundi -RRB- and chempa -LRB- ergot -RRB- , their yield is more than local varieties .
But with passage of time , intensity of these diseases can take humongous form like has happened in many places also .
So it is necessary to know more elaborately the mutual relation between local varieties and nitrogen .
Keeping in mind soil type , growth rate , absorption etc . it can be best to make a decision on the time of installment of use of nitrogen fertilizer .
To take good yield of bajra , making use of phosphorus is also mandatory , it ` s necessity was experienced in 1923 only .
Use of phosphorus along with nitrogen will be very beneficial .
Presence or absence of positive response towards phosphorus is dependent on the inherent fertility strength inside the soil .
This strength is different based on the situation and land type .
So somewhere yield increases due to it ` s use and somewhere does not .
Other than this , this also is a proved truth that because the level of inherent production capacity of local varieties is low also , probably beneficial effect of phosphorus can not be found .
The total amount of phosphorus is to be given at the time of sowing only .
Using it tying a wooden round with an indigenous plough is found to be best .
In this pit only the seed can be sowed by the kera process .
To take full advantage of the available nitrogen , on having less potash in the soil , the use of this is necessary .
On arrival of drought situation , due to potash , amount of nitrate increases .
Gopalkrishna -LRB- 1960 -RRB- has studied the effect of copper -LRB- copper -RRB- taking the local varieties of bajra .
In this experiment , he saw that , with the use of copper there was increase in the rate of growth till the vegetative stage and after this till the flower came the rate of growth reduced .
After this , again increase was found in this .
Collection of dry ingredients from seedling stage till vegetative stage was found to be more .
Using copper in the amount of 20 and 50 P.P.M was more beneficial .
Conclusion is that , on using in amount of 20 P . P . M . it was seen possible for produce to increase .
Under the All India Large Grain Improvement Project also research was done taking zinc .
This was researched because it was found on the Hisar center that , by using zinc the green leaf disease wa less in hybrid bajra .
In no center , there was no special effect on the yield of hybrid bajra and by it ` s use there was no effect even on the severity of green leaf disease .
That experiment was successful to a large extent in showing the importance of nutritive elements for taking good yield of madua .
From experiments done in Andra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu also it was known that full benefit of the inherent production capacity of madua can be taken only by using nitrogen etc . .
By use of phosphorus in enough quantity there is less outbreak of blast disease on madua .
By use of chemical fertilizers the yield of madua was found to be more in comparison to bio fertilizers .
Autumn crop from 1960 to 1962 research work was done on places of dry farming .
Till sometime , by giving phosphorus in the form of chemical fertilizer , due to increase in the it ` s level in the soil , only fertilizer with nitrogen was needed to be given .
The author ` s own opinion is that on using bio fertilizers continuously , it is natural for qualities of soil to improve and also improvement happens in the health of soil .
The ability to retain water in the soil and composition of the structure of soil particles etc . is included in this improvement .
These qualities have lot of importance in the areas of dry farming .
So if available the use of bio fertilizers should be definitely done .
Yes , this is for sure that , bio fertilizers can be used mixing with compost or cow dung .
Such a compost is called super compost .
It is found in experiments that by use of this compost , increase has been found in the percentage amount of nitrogen and phosphorus in the grains of madua .
Probably , by giving nitrogen at the time of sowing or in two or three installments , there was no special effect on the yield of madua .
Yes , this was definitely found that , on giving half amount of nitrogen at the time of sowing and remaining half 42 days after sowing , there was little increase in the yield of grains .
On giving nitrogen through soil and leaves , it was found that giving it ` s entire amount in soil only is best .
In areas with dry farming if there is absence of moisture in the soil then by spraying other variety of nitrogen on the leaves there is a possibility of increase in the yield .
It is found best to use phosphorus fertilizers by the localization process in comparison to utera process .
It is found beneficial to use these fertilizers at the depth of 7-15 c . m . .
By doing this , the root of madua grows deep towards the nutritive elements consequently is capable of using the moisture in the lower levels of the soil .
On giving super phosphate mixing with cow dung at the time of sowing or one month before sowing by localization process , good yield of madua is obtained .
On localizing cow dung fertilizer , improvement is seen in the accumulation and preservation of ground water in the layers of madua .
Due to this reason , probably , it does not have to face absence of moisture and the possibility of the crop getting destroyed , on rains being less than normal , is reduced .
Nitrogen fertilizer can be given by uteran or localization process also .
If possible then localization process should be adopted because in this process lot of improvement is seen in the usefulness of nitrogen .
But it should be kept in mind that nitrogen fertilizer and the seeds of madua should not come in direct contact else there is a possibility of bad effect on germination .
In Karnataka to get good yield of madua , use of nitrogen and as required phosphorus and potash in very essential .
If the amount of salts in the soil is upto 400 P.P.M then bad effect does not fall on germination .
When the density of salts becomes more than this then it badly affects germination .
Plants become weak from the beginning only .
Going ahead , the effect of this weakness falls on their producing capacity .
The plants whose growth is good from the beginning , their producing capacity is also more .
So it is necessary for plants to get good environment for growth in the beginning .
The capacity of phosphorus containing fertilizers has a deep effect on the the type of soil .
The usefulness of phosphorus was found to be of high level in red soil in comparison to laterite and black soil .
In this soil , maximum part of used phosphorus was absorbed by the grains and chaff of madua but on laterite and black soil plants absorb this in very less amounts .
Ammonium phosphate in black soil and super phosphate in laterite soil is found to be best .
Response towards phosphorus could be seen only in the presence of nitrogen .
In some experiments , use of potash was found to be helpful in increasing yield with both nitrogen and phosphorus .
Probably , in madua of punasa season , only sheep are kept in the farm full night -LRB- sheep panning -RRB- and their excreta-urine are considered one and only means of giving nutritive elements to the soil .
Use of cow dung fertilizer is very less .
Fertilizer is used less in dry farming areas and more in watered areas because the level of yield is higher in these areas .
In remaining millets viz . proso millet , barnyard millet , little millet use of fertilizers is not done much .
In Tamil Nadu , along with chaina , use of fertilizer is found to be beneficial in kutaki also .
In this way , in one long term experiment of fertilizer use -LRB- 1930-40 -RRB- it was found that with continuous use of cow dung fertilizer an increase of 23 percent was found in the yield of kutaki .
Black mint meaning mentha piperita type vulgaris sol is a hard , sixty to ninety c . m . long , probably made of red color stem and dark green color leaves .
From this type a very volatile oil is extracted .
White mint mentha piperita type auphysinal is a small plant of 30 to 60 c . m . length .
It is less hard and it ` s color is light .
From this variety commercial peppermint oil is obtained .
The oil veins are mostly on the lower side of the leaves and they come on stems and flower bunches too .
White mint is 30 to 60 c . m . long , strong , including stem and leaves .
The natural place of the plant is moderate country but it can also grown on commercial level in the climate of Jammu and Kashmir and if means of irrigation are available then it can be sowed in northern India also .
As much good yield is obtained in the Kashmir valley that much is not obtained in these areas .
In May and June after the new first crop , the nature of color of the plant becomes active .
And after the third crop the length of the crop becomes short .
This is a upright plant .
Deep moldy , sandy soil is most useful for mint so that the entry of the roots can happen easily .
Soil should not be light , dull and alkaline .
Highest P . H . value should be upto 4 to 7.5 .
Water clearance should be good and it should be kept in mind that soil doesn ` t dry up .
Sticky soil is not good for it ` s farming .
Before sowing , fertilizers like super phosphate and potash should be mixed in the soil .
Entire farm should be split into small beds so that there is ease in watering and water clearance .
The best time for replanting is from the third week of December to mid of February .
If use of sapling has to be done for replanting then wait should be done for some warm weather to come .
By replanting of sapling in place of bhustaariyan there is a lot of benefit .
Replanting should not be done in cold season .
In the season of growing this plant needs enough water .
Two or three days after every cutting , watering should be done .
By this protection against termite happens .
In the scorching heat of April and June minimum one time a week watering should be done .
By fertilizer the amount of oil increases .
Along with fertilizer , use of cow dung fertilizer is also beneficial .
Lot of compost fertilizer should be put so that possibility of growing of weeds does not remain .
Green fertilizer mainly fertilizer of sanai and jowar stocks is beneficial for good yield .
Spraying of urea after every harvest is beneficial .
Smelling oil should be kept free from other smells .
For this it is essential that only distillation of mint is done .
By spraying of solution of seenwar , weeds can be stopped from growing .
For good yield and getting methol , it is very good to do cutting at the time of flowering .
When leaves start falling and flowering starts stopping then amount of oil reduces .
By cutting late , amount of menthol and sweetness of the smell reduces .
Generally , in northern India , flowers do not come , so when the lower leaves of the crop start falling then it is okay to do harvesting .
First harvest in May , second in July and third in October .
In the Tarai area of Uttar Pradesh , two times harvest is okay .
Oil obtained from early and unripe crop is of bad quality and it ` s price obtained in the market is less .
Peppermint growers mostly dry the herb properly , by this the weight is reduced and there is ease in keeping-lifting .
Distillation from dry herbs happens easily , along with it less fuel and volatility is needed .
As far as the question of fragrance and quality of oil is concerned , oil obtained from fresh plants is of good quality in comparison to dry leaves .
In the oil obtained from fresh leaves a special type of sweet aroma comes .
According to it , the efficacy of the oil obtained from fresh plants is more .
Ocimum -LRB- basil -RRB- sub-variety comes under the Labiatae family .
Their 50-60 sub-varieties are found which are found in the tropical and warm moderate climates of the earth .
9 varieties of this are found in India , of which some are foreign .
From many varieties of Ocimum volatile oil is obtained which is used in the medical and perfume industry .
Camphor is obtained in large quantities from some varieties .
These are very useful in the perfume industry .
Basil oil if obtained from Ocimum Bacilicum Linn .
O. Gratissimum Linn is called Ram tulasi .
Fragrant oil is obtained from this plant .
Ocimum is mostly grows in the form of annual plant .
This can be sowed from mid February till end of September .
Most manures and fertilizers are not needed for Ocimum .
By sowing the seed directly in the farm the plants grow well .
In this way sowing also becomes cheap .
After sowing the seeds , the seeds should be covered with mud by moving a light trowel .
Watering of the farm should be done 24 hours after sowing .
In this way the seeds come out in 10-15 days .
The plants start flowering in April .
At this time in April first harvesting should be done .
The plant of Ocimum Americanum is a 30-60 c . m . height upright , sweet smelling romil herb which is found abundantly almost all over India near the fields and in barren lands .
This plant is sometimes found in gardens or can be easily sowed with seeds .
Volatile oil of O . Americanum is brought to use in soaps and cosmetics like a perfume .
On experimental basis , camphor producing variety is sowed in Comoros Islands -LRB- Indian Ocean -RRB- , Kenya , Russia , United Kingdom , America and West Germany and from it 20 to 100 K . G . camphor per hector was obtained .
The leaves of this plant are shleshmi .
Curry of this plant is made .
It ` s fragrant leaves are used for dressing curries , soups and salads .
It ` s seeds mixing with other grains were used for eating in absence of food .
The decoction of this plant are used for cough and it ` s leaves for nevish .
In tooth ache it ` s gargles are also done .
The juice of leaves is given to children in cold , cough and its pulp is applied on parasitic skin diseases .
Fresh leaves are approved medicine in Homeopathy .
Ocimum Bacilicum Linn . this plant is commonly called sweet basil or European basil also .
This is almost 30-90 c . m . upright tall herb whose native place is Middle Asia and North-West India .
This is sowed in most places in India .
This plant is very changeable and it ` s botanical naming is very difficult .
Often one variety is given many names .
Fragrant oil is obtained from the leaves and flower vrunt .
This plant has an important place in the aromas , perfumes and fragrant liquids industry .
This is used widely in aromatic sweets , eatables , pickle-chutney , tooth pastes etc . .
Medicinal qualities are also found in this plant .
Warm juice of the leaves of this plant mixing in honey is given for treatment of swelling of throat .
Oil of basil -LRB- European variety -RRB- is widely used for sweets , cooked foods , cough , chutney ` s and some yogic fragrances , specially for giving strength and balance to jasmine mixtures .
Reunion oil also comes in such tasks .
Basil oil has insect-repelling and antifungal qualities .
It is dangerous for house flies and mosquitoes .
This plant is used in Homeopathy .
It ` s roots , bark and leaves give cynogen .
Leaves have alcoholic extracting and fruits have anti-bacterial capacity .
The seeds of this plant are colorless and it ` s taste oily , light blue .
When they are soaked in water , then a mucus comes out of it which is translucent and almost tasteless .
By water-decomposition of this mucus -LRB- 9.3 per -RRB- uronic acid , glucose , lylos and rhamnosa is obtained .
In northern India and in the lowlands of Nainital , it ` s farming is done in the form of autumn crop only .
Where severe winter and sometimes fog occurs .
In Assam and south India it ` s farming is done throughout the year .
Heavy irrigation is not needed for it ` s crop .
On the other hand , heavy and continuous rain badly affects it ` s crop .
Even then if it ` s crop stabilizes before the beginning of the rainy season then it can tolerate heavy rain also .
For it ` s farming fertile , well dried , sticky or light sticky soil of best quality is needed .
Light or sandy soil is not right for it .
Ocimum Gratissimum -LRB- Ram tulasi -RRB- is a plant almost 1-2 .5 meter tall , with many branches , long living which is found in almost entire India and Lanka .
O. Gratissimum is more sharp smelling compared to other varieties of this family .
It is mosquito-repelling and it is advised to sow this for keeping this insect under control .
The anti-bacterial action of the oil of O . Gratissimum is clear and toxicity and anxiety is lessened .
This oil is used for soothing ear ache , tooth pain , stomach ache of children .
The native place of Ocimum Kilimandscharicum is Kerala and East Africa .
This was brought in India and it ` s farming is being done .
This can be grown in irrigated and in-irrigated conditions in every kind of soil .
Camphor can be obtained from this plant , so in the days of second world war efforts were made to take camphor from it in Sudan and some other countries .
In India too it was sowed in different areas on experimental basis and encouraging results were obtained in Uttar Pradesh , West Bengal , Maharashtra , Mysore , Tamil Nadu , Kerala and Jammu .
This does not grow well in the flat lands of West Bengal but it flourishes very well in the lower hills of Darjeeling , now it is successfully grown in Rogo mountains and Sukana -LRB- Kalimpong Forest Division . -RRB- .
Camphor Basil plant grows on flat lands and hills up to the height of 900 meters .
Once after it stabilizes for many years , leaves can be taken from it .
If moisture is sufficient then this plant can tolerate lot of heat .
It can not tolerate temperature less than almost -2 degrees .
When the plant becomes almost 60 c . m . tall , starts flowering and lower leaves start becoming yellow , then leaves are taken .
In cold places where the plant is sowed in the form of annual , leaves are gotten twice .
When leaves on withering become dry then beating them they are separated and stored in bags or used .
Without destroying camphor , the leaves are kept till almost one year .
3.5 percent oil is obtained from dry leaves .
Maximum amount of camphor and oil is in the leaves and after that in flowers , very little amount is obtained from the stem .
Compared to leaves of plants grown from seeds , more amount of oil is obtained from the leaves of grafted plants .
By drying the leaves first , there is increase in the availability of oil .
More amount of oil is obtained in the dry months .
Oil extracted from camphor basil is light yellow colored and camphor of sharp aroma .
For the use in colors , this oil is said to be best than oil of linseed .
The surface obtained from this is shiny and hard .
O. Kilimandscharicum is the primary source of camphor but it ` s use in the form of economy is considered not possible , as long as commercial outlet of the oil got in the form of by-product is not found .
Oil from which partially camphor is removed has insect-repelling qualities .
It ` s effect is one third compared to pyrethrum extraction .
Basil is commonly sowed in gardens .
Hindus consider it holy and it is often grown in courtyards and temples .
It ` s two varieties O . Sanctum green variety -LRB- Shri Tulasi -RRB- is most common .
Leaves of other variety -LRB- black basil -RRB- are violet .
It is sowed by seeds .
The smell of this plant is fragrant and lovely and smell of clove is clearly experienced in this .
It is mentionable that the oil extracted from the plant from Phillipines has a sweet smell similar to saunf .
Leaves are used in salad and other foods like spice .
Medicinal qualities in it are also told .
Other than volatile oil , presence of alkalides , glycoside saponins and tannins in this plant are also mentioned .
In the juice of it ` s leaves swedkari , colic fever-reducing and appetite-increasing qualities are there .
Basil is used in cold and bronchial swelling and applied on ringworm and skin diseases .
In ear ache it ` s juice is dropped into the ear .
Farm is that area or piece of land which is brought to use in producing crop or cattle rearing , on which there is lordship of one farmer or many farmers together and whose boundary is fixed .
Different specialists have defined the word farm in different words .
Management means doing some work or the art of managing .
The need for management is similar in all industries .
For farm products there is necessity of land , labor , capital and managers .
The first three agents of production are tangible agents and fourth agent , produce of management , non-tangible .
Despite of abundance of tangible agents on the farm , in absence of managing agent , less produce is obtained .
The amount of produce obtained from a farm on different farms is found to be different because of difference in managing-capacity inspite of other tools of production being same .
The art of managing capacity found in a manager is a God-given gift .
By training this capacity in a manager can be increased .
The main goal of the farm-manager is help get the farmer maximum net profit from the various enterprises done on the farm .
The aim of the farmer is to get maximum profit from all enterprises undertaken on the farm , not getting maximum profit from any one enterprise undertaken on the farm , because farm is the group form of different enterprises .
Although getting maximum profit being the important goal of the farmer , it is not the ultimate goal also .
The ultimate aim of the farmer is increase in the standard of living and giving maximum happiness to members of the family .
Improvement in standard of living and happiness to members can only be obtained on getting maximum profit from the farm .
For successful handling of the farm , it is necessary for the manager to have full knowledge of farm managing .
By successful handling of farm means , getting maximum happiness to members of the family from the income earned from the farm .
Farmers take the decision on areas for different enterprises based on the prevailing prices , but the income obtained from the produce depends on the prevailing prices at the time of harvesting .
There is always an uncertainty of the prices got at the time of harvesting the crop .
So doing correct estimate of production , productivity and prices is necessary .
Farm-management knowledge is helpful in it ` s estimate .
Implementing the prepared farm-plan on the farm - the amount of profit acquired in the farm-plan is dependent on the implementation on farm-plan .
Farm-management knowledge is helpful in implementing the farm-plan .
In case of unfavorable weather or price there can also be loss in farm-plan .
So , the profit incurring from implementing the farm-plan also has to be bore by the farm-manager .
For success of farming-occupation , it is necessary for the farm-manager to have knowledge of popular ways of growing different crops in the area .
In different areas , due to difference in land , climate , economic and social factors , lot of difference is found in the ways and means of growing crops .
Without the knowledge of popular ways of farming in the area , farmers can not be successful in the profession .
Farmers-managers can obtain hands-on knowledge of popular farming techniques and procedures by seeing the farms of innovative farmers in the area .
So first it is necessary for farmers-managers to get hands-on knowledge of various crops grown in the area for the success of the farming-business .
Knowledge of professional principles of the manager .
In ancient times , farmers did not feel the need for professional principles of management , because farmers did not take farming in the form of profession but took it in the form of means of livelihood , because of which they did not give much attention to the profit earned form the occupation .
In present farmers take farming in the form of profession .
Buy most amount of production-equipment for production from the market .
So in present for maximum profit from farming occupation , it is necessary for the farmers to have knowledge of the professional principles of farm-management .
The knowledge of professional principles helps the farmer to take the following decisions on the farm , by which there is increase in the profit acquired .
In the amount needed by the farmers , there is an exceptional lack of capital .
For farming , a farmer borrows capital in the form of loan from various sources .
There is a lot of difference in the terms of accepting loan , interest-rates etc . in each loan-giving organization .
So farmers have to choose the right loan-giving organization for getting loan on low interest rates and easy installments .
Knowledge of farm-management principles helps farmers to take decisions relating to doing various tasks of farming on the farm .
For example , how much area should be taken under different crops on the fa ?
In what proportion should different crops be taken on the fa ?
What activities or crops should be chosen on the fa ?
In what amount should fertilizers be put in different fields per hector area .
In what proportion should the various equipments of production be replaced ? etc .
Total output : The amount of produce which is obtained from using different amounts of the production equipments is called total output .
The amount of produce obtained from the use of different amounts of production equipments is also different .
Average output : Average output means the average productivity of the production equipments .
Average output , total output and applied is in proportion to the amount of production equipments .
The result obtained by dividing the total amount of output obtained from the use of different amounts of production equipments by the amount of production equipment is called average output .
For example , if in one unit of land , by using 20 kilogram of nitrogen fertilizer , 8 quintal of total output is obtained then from per kilogram of nitrogen fertilizer , average output -LRB- 8  20 -RRB- = 0.40 quintal is obtained .
With increase in the amount of margin output there is an increase in the average output .
In the case of the margin output curve -LRB- from A to G point -RRB- being above the average output curve , the average output curve keeps growing upwards .
Meaning , till the margin output is more than the average output , average output keeps increasing .
On margin output being less than average output or margin output curve coming lower than average output curve -LRB- G to I and beyond -RRB- average output becomes less .
Meaning , till the amount of margin output is less than average output , average output keeps reducing .
Area 1 : the first area of output function is from starting point of production till that point where margin output curve cuts the average output curve -LRB- from A to H till use level of production equipment or 6 unit .
In this area there is constant increase in the amount of average output .
Margin output curve is above average output curve .
The place where margin output is equal to amount of average output , that point is the last point of this area .
This area of production-function is called irrational area , because in this area on doing production , on increasing the amount of production equipment , the amount of obtained profit also keeps increasing .
The aim of the farmer in doing production is not only to earn profit but to earn maximum amount of profit .
In this area there is a constant increase in the amount of average output and margin output due to which each additional unit of production equipment gives more profit than the earlier .
So to take decision to do production in this area is not correct .
For production , farmers have fixed equipments land , animals , etc . and variable equipments labor , capital , seeds , compost , fertilizer , insect-repelling medicines , irrigation , fodder , grains , etc . .
The principle of diminishing results mainly is exhibited at that time when the farmer wants to obtain maximum profit from one unit of land or one animal .
They constantly increase the amount of use of variable equipments for obtaining more amounts of output , but due to the boon of nature , as there is increase made in the amount of variable equipments per unit land or per animal then there is increase in the total output but the amount of increase in the production gradually keeps reducing constantly from the earlier amount of increase in production .
In other words , the increase in production in different units of variable equipments that happens at decreasing rate .
This is called the principle of diminishing returns .
If the price of wheat is 75 Rs . per quintal and price of nitrogen fertilizer is 2 Rs . per kilogram then use of 50 kilogram of nitrogen fertilizer only is most profitable for the farmer .
By using up to 60 kilograms of nitrogen fertilizer the surplus cost comes to 20 Rs . while as surplus income is obtained only 1875 Rs . .
By this there is deficit of 125 Rs in the total obtained profit .
Price of fertilizer 175 Rs . and price of wheat being 100 Rs per quintal , use of 60 kilogram of nitrogen fertilizer is most profitable for the farmer .
In this way , in the case of change in the production equipment and price of produce , the maximum profitable level of production equipment is found out .
The maximum profitable level of production equipment is different for different price situations .
In the case of price of fertilizer being 200 Rs per kilogram and price of wheat 100 Rs per quintal , 60 kilograms of fertilizer is the maximum profit giving level because at this level ratio of surplus produce and amount of surplus production equipment is 0.025 when the inverse ratio of their prices is 0.020 .
As this ratio is more then the inverse ratio of the prices and after this it starts reducing , so at that level of prices use of 60 kilogram fertilizer is the favorable amount of profit giving level for the farmer .
In the same production function , in both cases of price of fertilizer being 175 Rs per kilogram and price of wheat 100 Rs per quintal and price of fertilizer 175 Rs . per kilogram and price of wheat 75 Rs per quintal , upto the use-level of 60 k.g nitrogen fertilizer , ratio of surplus produce and surplus production equipment is more than the inverse ratio of their per unit prices .
The general specialities of a iso-product curve are those only which are of indifferent curve , like two iso-product curves do not cut each other and iso-product curve bends down towards the left .
The downward bend of a iso-product curve depends on the capacity of one equipment to replace another equipment .
The combination of equipment that is needed for producing some thing of a definite amount , that can be modified by replacing the amounts of one equipment by amounts of other equipment .
The bend of iso-product curve is the ratio of amounts of marginal output -LRB- MPX1 -RRB- .
The law of principles of equi-marginal ratio - according to the principle of opportunity cost , for obtaining maximum profit on the farm , each unit of limited resources has to be used in such a way that from each unit of production resource maximum marginal income can be obtained .
Farmers get maximum profit by taking decisions based on the knowledge of marginal income .
To take decision according to the principle of equi-marginal ratio , farmers need low numbers .
Fixed or firm-cost - All the costs on the farm , which do not bring any change in the amount of production of the enterprise , are called fixed costs .
Fixed costs are not related to the amount of production of the enterprise .
Fixed cost remains same in all situations of having more production or doing no production or having less production .
Rent on land , interest of loan taken , depreciation of machines , tax , amount of installment of crop insurance , rent of electricity meter , etc . are called fixed costs on the farm .
If the total income obtained from the farm is more than total cost , then a farmer should keep farming till that time till which the amount of surplus income becomes more than the amount surplus cost .
By taking decision based on this law , there is constant increase in the amount of profit obtained by the farmer .
This principle of farm-management describes various enterprises on the farm , knowledge of combination of crops of foodgrains , pulses , cotton , sugarcane , oilseeds , animal husbandry , poultry , fruits and vegetables etc . and the relation found among of various enterprises .
The goal of this principle is help make maximum amount of profit from the various activities undertaken by farmers on the farm .
The principle of combination of activities - presents a solution to the problem of , in what proportions should various activities be done on the farm , so that maximum profit is obtained from the available production resources .
Disconnected activities - Disconnected activities are those in which there is no relation between them .
By increasing the level of one activity no effect comes on the level of other activity .
Meaning , both activities neither compete with each other activity for production resources and nor are they helpful to each other activity in increasing production .
When there is no relation among different activities then decision should be taken to produce two activities in a separate way .
Like bajra in the monsoon season and wheat in the winter season .
When the production resources available on the farm are in unlimited amount , then a situation of incoherence is found in the above mentioned outputs .
Helping or complementary -LRB- complementary -RRB- activities - Complementary activities are those which are helpful in increasing output of other activities , meaning when efforts are made to increase the output of one activity , the output of other activity increases on its own .
Like legume crops -LRB- barseem , peas etc. -RRB- and foodgrains crops .
By the efforts done for increasing the output of legume crops , the production of foodgrain crops sowed in that land in the next season increases on its own because of filling of more amount of nitrogen in the soil .
Farming is considered the backbone of economy of India .
By various programs and efforts run through the different five year plans , farming has got a prestigious place in the national economy .
Almost 64 % laborers have got wages in the agriculture sector .
In 1950-51 the share of agriculture was 59.2 % in the gross domestic product which decreasing remained 36.4 % in 1982-82 and 34.9 % in 1990-91 and 25 % in 2001-2002 .
This decreasing remained 18.5 % during the period 2006-07 based on average .
During tenth plan -LRB- 2002-2007 -RRB- the average increase in gross domestic product was 7.6 % while as in this period the annual growth rate of agriculture and related sectors remained 2.3 % .
In the first 6 years of the new century that started from 2001-02 , the annual general average increase rate has been 3.0 % , 10 % in 2003-04 and 6 % in 2005-06 .
Almost 28 % of the country ` s national income is obtained from agriculture .
Almost 70 % population is dependent on agriculture for its livelihood .
A big share of exports from the country comes from agriculture .
In non agricultural sectors , in big amounts , consumer goods and raw material for many industries is sent by this sector only .
Agriculture is a occupation related to producing food and other material by the means of farming and forestry .
This has played an important role in the birth and growth of civilizations .
Dr. Norman Borlaug who is considered the father of ` Green Revolution ` in India had launched many programs to make the country foodgrain rich .
Animal husbandry and insect farming also has contribution in agriculture .
This occupation was developed to grow plants and collect foodgrains .
Gardening is also a form of agriculture .
Many levels of techniques and know-how is included in agriculture , in it those techniques are included by which land useful for growing plants is expanded , for this channels of water are dug and other forms of irrigation are used .
Growing crops on cultivable land and grazing cattle on pastures by shepherds are mainly activities related to agriculture .
Knowing the different forms of agriculture and developing them have been the main point of discussion in the last century .
In India , in the beginning years of the fifth decade , the daily availability of grains per person was 395 gram , which increased to reach to 468 gram in 1990-91 , 528.77 gram in 1996-97 , 467 gram in 1999-2000 , 455 gram in 2000-01 , 416 gram in 2001-02 , 494 gram in 2002-03 , 436 gram 2003-04 .
In year 2005-06 this availability per person per day became 412 gram .
In the world the country farming pulses in maximum area in India only .
Inspite of this the per person daily availability of pulses has not been satisfactory .
Usually per year a decrease has been recorded in it .
In year 1951 the daily per person availability of pulses was 60.7 gram , that same became 69.0 in 1961 , 51.2 gram in 1971 , 37.5 gram in 1981 , 41.6 gram in 1991 , 30.0 gram in 2001 .
Hybrid seed of cotton was first made in India only .
In different areas of agriculture also Indian scientists have achieved success in developing most advanced and useful technology .
Crop-cycle has become full of variety .
In the time after the green revolution started from 1967-68 to 2005-06 the annual growth rate of agriculture produce was approximately 2.45 % .
Foodgrain output from 890 lakh tons in 1964-65 increased to become 2098 lakh ton in 1999-2000 , 1968 lakh ton in 2000-01 , 2119 lakh ton in 2001-02 , 1748 lakh ton in 2002-03 , 2132 lakh ton in 2003-04 , 1984 lakh ton in 2004-05 , 2086 lakh ton in 2005-06 , while as foodgrain output is epected to be 2173 lakh during 2006-07 .
As a result of the change in the crop-cycle , the importance of non-traditional crops like sunflower , soyabean and groundnut which grows in summer is increasing .
In 1970-71 the agriculture output index was 85.9 .
From the index 102.1 of 1980-81 and index 148.4 of 1990-91 , this index increased to become 178.8 in 2001-02 , 150.4 in 2002-03 , 182.8 in 2003-04 , 177.3 in 2004-05 and in 2005-06 this index became 191.6 while as in 2006-07 this index is expected to be 197.1 .
The main reason for this is the increase in the yield of rice , wheat , pulses , oilseeds , sugarcane and other cash crops .
In India mainly three crops are sown - monsoon , winter and summer -LRB- jaayad -RRB- .
In the crop of monsoon mainly there are corn , jowar , maize , paddy , groundnut , soyabean , lentils , etc . .
Among main crops of winter are wheat , barley , chickpeas , peas , mustard , coleseed etc . .
In crops of summer mainly vegetables are only sown .
93.1 % of the total 3287.3 lakh hector of geographical area of the country is brought in the use of farming .
Farming is one such occupation in which there are many factors for production on which there is no control of the farmer or scientists .
In such factors , climate is the most important factor .
In various regions , other than the usual season-cycle also when the weather will become how can not be known .
Other than this , crops are changed according to the climate and not climate according to the crop .
So only , which crop should be sown in any place , depends on the climate , soil , height , monsoon etc . of there .
Today many opportunities are available for agricultural engineers .
They have been offered laboratories and also all facilities for research etc. , by which the country can be made foodgrain rich .
Agricultural engineers ` encouragement and for their recognition they are given the ` Borlaug Award ` .
The main specialities of Indian agriculture are as follows .
Most part of Indian agriculture depends on the monsoon for irrigation .
An important speciality of Indian agriculture is multitude of units of landholdings and their size being less .
In Indian agriculture , the total area under cultivation is divided into parts and all the parts are situated at a distance .
In direct or indirect form , there is more load of population on the land .
Agricultural produce is dependent mainly on the nature .
Due to poverty , Indian farmer does less capital investment in farming .
Priority is given to production of foodgrains .
Agriculture is considered a means of livelihood .
In Indian agriculture most farming activity depends on animals .
In India , variety is seen in the use of land .
In 1950-51 there were forests in 404.8 lakh hectors land out of the total geographical area 3287.3 lakh hectors of the country .
In 1998-99 this area increased to become 689.7 lakh hectors and in 2000-01 694.07 lakh hectors .
In the same period , cultivable land from 1187.5 lakh hectors increased to become 1426 lakh hectors and 1411.01 lakh hectors respectively .
If seen from the viewpoint of types of crops then foodgrain farming is done more than non-foodgrains in the total cultivable area , but the farming of foodgrain which was done on 76.7 % land in 1950-51 , that has decreased to remain 65.6 % during 1998-99 .
According to agricultural census , area coming under big cultivation -LRB- 10 hectors and more than that -RRB- decreased to remain 17.3 % in 1990-91 compared to 20.1 % in 1985-86 .
In the same way , area coming under marginal cultivation -LRB- less than 1 hector of cultivation -RRB- from 13.4 % in 1985-86 increased to become 15 % in 1990-91 .
Indian agriculture is full of many diversities .
Indian agriculture is influenced by climatic diversity , fertility of soil , changing weather , method of farming , etc . .
Based on amount of output and method of farming , agriculture of India can be categorized in the form of pure and hybrid agriculture .
Pure agriculture is basically traditional type of agriculture through which only basic necessities of the farmers are fulfilled .
Agronomy - Agronomy -LRB- Agronomy -RRB- is that branch of agriculture under which principles of crop production and land management and agricultural activities are studied .
Importance of crops - The life of every creature living on the earth is dependent directly or indirectly on plants .
From plants , other than food and oxygen for creatures , clothes , dwelling and medicines etc . are also supplied for the population .
One yearly - These crops complete their life cycle in one year or lesser time than that , like grains , wheat , barley , gram , soyabean etc . .
Two yearly - In such plants , first year vegetational growth of the plant happens and second year , flowers and seeds are formed in them .
Meaning , they complete their life cycle in two years .
Multi yearly - Such plants live upto many years .
But in their life cycle every year or in a gap of one year flowers and fruits come and the life cycle gets completed .
Like - lucerne , napier grass .
Categorization based on seasons .
Monsoon - These crops need high temperatures and humidity at the time of sowing and at the time of ripening , dry atmosphere .
In northern India they are sown in June-July .
Grains , corn , jowar , bajra , green lentils , groundnuts , sugarcane etc . are the main crops of this season .
Crops of monsoon come in C3 class .
In the plants of this class , available water capacity and light synthesis rate both are more while as light breathing rate is less .
Autumn - These crops need less temperature at the time of sowing and dry and warm atmosphere at the time of ripening .
These crops generally are sown in the months of October-November .
Wheat , barley , gram , mustard , baraseem etc . are the main crops of this class .
Autumn crops come in C4 class .
The speciality of the plants of this class is that their available water capacity and light synthesis rate both is less .
In this way , in these plants activity of breathing and light synthesis happens in the light of the day also .
Jaayad - A good ability to tolerate scorching heat and dry winds is there in the crops of this class .
In northern Indian these crops are mainly sown in March-April .
Watermelon , cucumber , gherkins etc . are the main crops of this class .
India ` s total area is 32.8 crore hectors , of whose 92.2 % numbers related to land use are available .
In present , in the country , pure cultivated area is 16.2 crore hector .
In this way 51 percent of the total area comes under agriculture , while as , pastures on almost 4 percent land , forests on 21 percent land and 24 percent land is barren or without any use .
The 24 % barren land also includes 5 % fallow land , in which without sowing crops every year , are sowed every three or five years , by which the fertility of soil is accumulated .
Only on 28 percent part , that is , 4.5 crore hectors land of this 52 % pure cultivated area , enough facility for irrigation is available , while as the all irrigated area of the country is 8 crore hectors .
In this way , of the total cultivable land , farming done on almost 72 % part depends only on monsoon and on more than half part of the total irrigated area , irrigation is done by small means of irrigation , wells , ponds , lakes , reservoirs , dams , tube-wells , temporary dams of mud , canals and water springs .
Irrigation of rest of the area is done by big means like canals , streams etc . .
India is a country of spices .
From ancient times only India has been trading spices in foreign countries , of which history is a witness .
Although spices have been playing an important role in Indian agriculture from centuries but their importance grew more by which French , Portuguese and British traders got attracted to this country .
As a result of the successful historical part of these traders this country remained clenched in the clamp of slavery for 300 years .
After getting independence , the growing deficit of foodgrains did not let the attention of the government and the agriculture department to go towards this important agricultural produce .
As a result , no increase could happen in per unit output and productivity of spices because the farming of spices was done somehow in the traditional way .
But after 25 years of heavy research , along with development of high yielding varieties of different spices , scientific technique of farming was developed .
The consolidated bookkeeping of which is the plot of this book by adopting which farmers can obtain more net profit along with more output .
India is a country of spices .
In ancient times , people from different countries of the world start salivating with greed on the name of spices from here .
The want of spices only forced Vasco-da-Gama to come to India bearing lakhs of obstacles .
India is biggest producer , consumer and exporter of spices in the world .
IN the world 70 types of spice crops are grown , but on the crop rich soil of India variety of crops of spices like black pepper , red chilli , black cardamom , cardamom , clove , cinnamon , turmeric , ginger , coriander , fennel , fenugreek , nigella , thyme , mace , nutmeg , cumin , dill , saffron and garlic are grown in big quantities whose classification is done on many bases .
Annual spices - The life cycle of these spice-crops is completed in one season or one year .
Meaning these crops are grown every year in some special season .
Like - turmeric , ginger , coriander , fenugreek , fennel , thyme , mangarail , garlic and red chilli .
Multi-year spices - After sowing this class of spice crops , spices are gotten for many years , so they are called multi-year spices like black pepper , cinnamon , clove , nutmeg , mace , small cardamom and big cardamom etc . .
From ancient times Indians are using spices for making food tempting , tasty , interesting , zesty and fragrant .
None of the Indian delicacy can be made without spices and even if made it ` s taste and color becomes dull .
Thus spices lend attractive color , tempting taste and agreeable aroma to Indian vegetarian and non-vegetarian food .
This is the reason that Indian food wins the mind of native of any country of the world due to its tangy taste , aroma and color .
Food without spices in like mud .
In India spices are used with predominance on auspicious and happy occasions .
In the worship of Godesses-Gods spices like clove and turmeric have special importance .
In the worship of Mother Sheetala ladies offer ground clove and cinnamon mixed in water .
On the auspicious occasion of marriage the groom-bride are applied a paste of turmeric by which body becomes clean , soft , beautiful and attractive .
Even now in villages the cloth colored with powder of turmeric is given to wear for the groom-bride on the occasion of marriage , but slowly in the modern environment the importance of these rites-rituals is fading away .
Medication may be Ayurvedic or Allopathic or Homeopathic , in all spices are the unfailing medicine for thousands of ailments .
In rural areas even today spices only are used in order to cure many types of diseases .
Our ancestors must have made the use of spices like black pepper and turmeric compulsory in our food ingredients , because black pepper has a strong quality of disease resistance and turmeric is cancer resistant .
By use of spices edible substances are preserved .
Edible substances like chutney , pickles stay preserved for long time only on the strength of spices and do not get spoiled .
Because species have the infinite capacity to destroy germs .
The history of spices is older than the birth of Greece and Rome .
Along with perfumes and cloths Indian spices were also brought into Mesopotamia , Arab and Egyptian countries by ships .
The greed for spices only had made many voyagers to stand on the the shores of Indian seas .
Even before the start of this century , Greek traders used to collect in the markets of south India and along with other important things definitely used to buy spices .
As much Indian spices were dear in the Vasco-da-Gama period , that chain of selling price continued after centuries because spices only were helpful for filling of the insufficient food of Europe .
In that medieval period one pound of mace was equal to the cost of three sheep or half a cow .
The sea voyage of Vasco-da-Gama started a race for supremacy over international spices market .
Till three centuries after this , western European countries Portugal , Spain , France , Holland and Great Britain taking spices from spices producing countries kept having brutal sea fights among each other .
In all practicality , the charming history of spices became a story of finding seizing spices by competitive , terrible , adventurous ship voyages .
Coriander is a famous spice .
There are many amazing qualities in it .
Leaves and seeds of coriander both are used in food .
The green leaves of coriander are used in the form of spice , salad , chutney and medicine .
Sugar , protein , calcium , iron , and vitamin ` A ` are in large amount in it ` s leaves .
The water of coriander is brought to use in the stoppage of indigestion and other stomach ailments .
Actually the farming of coriander is done in some amount all over India but it ` s commercial farming is done in Gujarat , Rajasthan , Haryana , Punjab , Bihar , Andhra Prdesh , Madhya Pradesh , Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra .
In Bihar among the districts growing coriander Champaran , Vaishali , Mujaffarpur , Samastipur , Saran , Bhojpur , Patna , Begusarai , Khagdiya , Munger , Bhagalpur and Sahebgunj are main .
In Bihar , a very large area of Ganges ait from Buxar to Sahebgunj is full of farms of coriander .
In this area the productivity of coriander is more compared to other areas , the reason is that the soil of the ait is very fertile .
For coriander you can choose from light mold soil to heavy clayey soil but be careful that there are enough organics in the soil and also has capacity to hold water .
Do not choose such a soil in which water gets accumulated when it rains .
Coriander can be taken as a baraani crop in the ait area after the flood water has receded .
Ploughing the soil once with a soil turning plough and twice with an indigenous plough make the soil loose but flat by moving a trowel .
Deep effect of the time of sowing falls on the produce of coriander .
From the research done in the Dholi area of Rajendra Agricultural University , it has been proved that the best time to sow coriander is between 15 October to 30 October .
On sowing the crop after this gradually there is decrease in the output and the outbreak of hump disease and white calcified disease of coriander start becoming faster .
So for good output definitely sow coriander at the right time .
In our country most farmers are marginal who want to grow the crop of coriander in the form of inter crop .
Coriander can be grown in the form of inter crop in the middle of crops like tobacco , potato , sweet potato , autumn time corn , cabbage , eggplant , tomato , chilli and peas .
By growing inter crop of coriander in eggplant , the attack of insects also becomes less .
In northern Bihar autumn time sugarcane , inter-farming of coriander is very common and a source of good income also .
In this way , for green leaves also , you can earn good income by doing inter-farming of coriander in the middle of these crops .
The straws-grass shoots grown in the crop of coriander have averse effect on it ` s output .
So for more produce de-weeding-gudaaee is very necessary .
In he baaraani regions 30-40 days after sowing when the plants become 5-6 c.m long then de-weeding-gudaaee should be done .
By doing this the farm will stay weed free and moisture will be retained in the farm .
For healthy seeds and good produce , uprooting unwanted plants from the rows of crops , the distance between plant and plant should be kept 15 to 20 c.m .
The uprooted plants should be sold in the market in the form of green leaves .
Wilt -LRB- wilt -RRB- - This disease happens due to a fungus named Fusarium Oxyporum .
Because of this disease there is a 40 to 50 percent decrease in the output .
The leaves of the disease inflicted plant first start becoming yellow and then start falling .
Later the whole plant withers .
The convective fibers of the roots become colorless .
This is a soilborne disease .
This fungus stays in the soil for long periods .
Powder fungus - this disease happens due to a fungus named Erysiphe Polygoni .
Because of the infliction of this disease , a white powder like substance collects on the leaves and other parts .
As a result fruits are either not borne and if they are borne they do not ripen properly on the plant .
For its prevention 0.03 percent Sulphex medicine has to be sprinkled .
Coriander along with a spice is also a home medicine .
Its effect is coolness giving .
The seed of coriander is anti-acidic , anti-gastric diseases , appetizing , takes away indigestion and vomiting .
By chewing 8-10 seeds of coriander bad breath of the mouth goes away .
By usage of coriander in spices indigestion ends and helps in stomach bloating .
In India fenugreek is used in in the form of vegetables and spice .
Its leaves and tender legume are used in the form of vegetables .
Dry seeds are used in spice , seasoning vegetables , pickles and medicines .
Seeds of fenugreek are anti-phlegmic , anti-pyretic , diuretic and beneficial in stomach ailments .
Fenugreek is divided into two parts .
First part is common fenugreek whose botanical name is `` Trigonella Foenum-graecum `` .
Common fenugreek is grown all over the country but compared to south it gives more output in north India .
Its plants grow quickly and straight erect offshoots come out and with the support of each leaf 2-3 flowers bloom .
Leaves are long and straight .
In the other part comes the name of kasuri or champa fenugreek .
Rajendra revolution - This type of development was done at the Dholi center situated in Rajendra Agricultural University .
Plants are bushy of medium height and many branches .
This is a `` leaf-spot `` disease resistant variety .
The crop gets ready for first harvesting 120 days after sowing .
It ` s average output -LRB- of seeds -RRB- is 1200 to 1500 kilogram per hector .
Co. -1 - This variety was developed by Tamil Nadu Agricultural University Coimbatore .
This is a fast growing variety .
Gets ready for first harvesting 90 days after sowing .
Its average output is 4000 to 5000 kilogram green leaf and 650 to 700 kilogram seeds per hector .
Methi No. 14 and Methi No . 47 - These are varieties of Maharashtra Agricultural Department which are juicy and full of Vitamin `` C `` .
Its output is not good .
E.C. 491 - This is a Punjab Agricultural Department approved one good variety .
Type-226 - This is a Indian Agricultural Research Institute , New Delhi recommended one good variety .
Fenugreek is crop of the cold season .
It easily withstands the attack of frost .
For its vegetational development long cold weather is necessary .
Fenugreek can be grown in all kinds of soil .
But for good output nutrient rich loose soil is specially useful .
A good provision of water draining out from the fields is necessary .
Slight acidic to slight alkaline soil is found to be good for its farming .
In the plains of North India the correct time for sowing fenugreek is mid September to mid November .
For getting leaves it can be sowed in February month also .
In hilly regions its sowing should be done in March-April .
Kasuri fenugreek should be sown in October month .
The first harvesting of common fenugreek should be done approximately 4 weeks after sowing .
This time the cutting of the plants should be done from near the ground .
After that harvest fenugreek for four to five times .
If seeds have to be taken then stop harvesting the plants after 2 to 3 harvests .
Of Kasuri fenugreek , for seeds , stop harvesting after taking 5 to 6 harvests .
On stopping harvesting the plants will grow and they will bear flowers , fruits and seeds .
When the fenugreek fruits ripening get ready then harvest the crop for seeds .
From various experiments it is known that for extra profit , before letting the plants to grow for seed production , two harvests from kasuri fenugreek and three from common fenugreek can be done for vegetable .
If the plants are let to grow without cutting then more seeds are formed .
Common and kasuri fenugreek grown for seeds is ready in 155 and 165 days for seed production respectively .
As far as possible , keep the crop grown for seeds free from grass-weeds .
Egypt is considered as the native place of origin of thyme .
In India its farming is done mainly in Madhya Pradesh , West Bengal , Uttar Pradesh , Gujarat , Rajasthan , Maharashtra and Bihar .
In Bihar state , farming of thyme is mainly done in Samastipur , Mujaffarnagar , Vaishali , Patna , Begusarai , Saran and Champaran districts .
Farming of thyme can be done in all kinds of soils .
Light soil is not good for its farming .
For more production banks of rivers are found to be useful .
Clayey loose soil which is full of nutrient elements and has the capacity to retain moisture is found to be best for its yield .
The output of thyme depends on its variety , fertility of the soil and care of crop .
Its average yield is almost 8 to 10 quintal per hector .
Mangrail has an important place among seedy spices .
Its farming is done in the form of cash crop .
By farming this more income can be earned from per unit area compared to other winter crops .
Black cumin -LRB- Nigella Sativa -RRB- is a member of Amblyferi family .
This is one yearly and vegetable plant .
The height of the plants is 40 to 50 c . m . and leaves are 2.5 to 3.0 c . m . long and pointed .
Its flowers are blue and seeds black .
Its farming is done in our country India mainly in Bihar , Punjab , Rajasthan , Himachal Pradesh , Assam and Uttar Pradesh .
The best time to sow black cumin is from mid October to end October .
By sowing this time the plants grow well and have lots of yield .
Likewise good output can be obtained by sowing it even till end of November .
It is necessary to keep the seeds for almost 10 to 15 hours putting in water before sowing the seeds .
At the end the seeds have to be strained and dried in shade for almost 2 hours .
Sow the seeds at a depth of almost 3 c . m . .
By doing this the seeds germinate well .
The seeds taking root , the plants come out of the ground after almost 10 days .
Garlic is a special crop of spices .
Garlic is used in both non-vegetarian and vegetarian types of food .
It is used in vegetables , chutney , pickle and lentils also .
Garlic is also used to cure many types of ailments .
So it is said that garlic is the household doctor of the rural people .
In India farming of garlic is done in almost 30 thousand hector land .
From which 27 lakh quintal yield is obtained .
From India per year 262 tons of garlic was exported in year 1993-94 from which 3 crores 16 lakhs Rs . of foreign currency was earned .
A brown or yellow color sulphur compound named Allyl is found in garlic oil .
By its oil mosquito larva die after becoming unconscious , with that by spraying on house flies , red bug of cotton , tuber moths of potato and red palm weevil eggs , the babies do not come out and the crop can be saved from potential harm .
By daily use garlic supplements the food in protein , carbohydrates , calcium , iron , phosphorus and vitamin C and B etc . .
Garlic is largely grown in Uttar Pradesh , Bihar , Delhi , Haryana , Punjab , Himachal Pradesh , Rajasthan , Maharashtra and Madhya Pradesh .
Cold climate is necessary for growing garlic .
At the time of forming of the garlic cloves smaller and at the time of ripening longer days are needed .
Garlic can be successfully grown up to 1000 to 1400 meter height from the sea level and up to 70 percent humidity .
Mainly garlic is of two types , first white and second red .
In food mostly white garlic is only used because there is less hotness in it .
Because of more hotness in red garlic it used less in food and more in medicines .
Type-56-4 : Its bulbs are small .
This is developed by Punjab Agricultural University , Ludhiana by selection process .
Per bulb the number of cloves is from 25 to 34 .
Solan : This variety was developed by Himachal Pradesh Agricultural University , Palampur .
The leaves are slightly long and of dark color than other varieties .
The cloves are quite thick than other varieties and its typical yield can be obtained from 110 to 120 quintals per hector .
Coimbatore-2 : This variety was developed by Tamil Nadu Agricultural University , Coimbatore in 1991 .
The cloves are of white color and very attractive .
The typical yield of this variety is 110 - to 125 quintals per hector .
Garlic I . C . 49381 and I . C . 42891 : This variety was developed by Indian Agricultural Research Institute , New Delhi .
Their typical yield is up to 130 quintals per hector .
This variety becoming ripe gets ready in 160 to 180 days .
Garlic can be grown in the form of between crop in the crops of red chili , tobacco , potato , fennel etc . .
In northern Bihar , garlic can be grown as between crop in a commercial form in between two rows of tobacco crop by which the cost for growing tobacco crop gets covered .
Mix 200 quintal cow dung manure per hector in the first stage of preparation of farm .
Use urea 270 quintals per hector -LRB- 1 part at the time of sowing and remaining three times -RRB- .
Mix muriate of potash at the rate of 100 kilogram per hector in the soil .
In the last stage of preparation of the farm putting 20 kilogram V . H . C . -LRB- ten percent -RRB- dust in the soil per hector mix nicely .
For sowing buy the cloves from any trustworthy institute .
Before sowing first choose healthy bulbs then breaking these healthy bulbs choose good cloves .
The work of sowing the cloves is done from September to November in the plains and from March to May in the hilly areas .
For obtaining good yield do sowing by dibbling at a distance of 7.5 c . m . in rows made at a distance of 15 c . m . .
Do the first watering immediately after sowing of cloves and later keep watering at interval of 10 to 15 days .
For obtaining typical yield do the first weeding of the crop by a trowel almost 20 to 25 days after sowing and second weeding after almost 15 days .
After that , keeping attention on the weeds and the state of the crop should keep doing the work of restricting weeds .
Predetermination of the weeds can be done by chemical process but ventilation of air in the soil is obstructed by which the size of the bulbs becomes small .
Blight -LRB- Blight -RRB- - This disease happens by Alternaria Pelindulai fungus .
Yellow and white spots are seen on the leaves in this disease .
The spots make a strip like tear in the leaves .
The cure of this disease can be done by seed treatment by Indofil M-45 or by paying attention to the spread of the disease on the crop by spraying bordeaux mixture .
Smut -LRB- Smut -RRB- - This disease happens by fungus Urocyctis cepulae .
The disease in seen in the form of black spots on the tender leaves and older leaves start withering and in the worse stage of the disease the development of the bulbs stops .
For prevention , work of sowing should be done by treating 10 kilogram cloves with 50 gram airesan .
White falling disease happens by Sclerotium cepivorum fungus .
The bulbs affected by this look healthy but soon start rotting .
This is more effective from July to October .
The prevention of the disease can be done by choosing again and again the infected cloves during storage .
Garlic blast - The spots of this disease are deep brown in color like ash .
The affected part getting destroyed falls down the reason for the disease it still not known .
So prevention can be done by destroying the plant burning from the root as soon as the symptoms of the disease are seen .
Mildew - This disease happens by Peronospora destructer .
The symptoms are found in the form of yellow spots because of which the growth of the plant stops and symptoms of chlorosis start being seen .
Prevention of the disease , dissolving at the rate of 3.0 kilogram jinev or sulphur or nevam or Indofil M-45 in 1000 litre water per hector should be sprayed .
The crop of garlic ripening gets ready in 130 to 180 days .
Digging the bulbs with stem , tying in small bundles are dried for three-four days keeping the sun .
After this breaking the stems , separating the bulbs are stored in the normal atmosphere at a temperature of 32 to 36 degree F . and 60 percent humidity for a long time .
The yield of garlic depends on the variety , soil , weather and plant care .
In normal circumstances up to 120 to 130 quintal per hector of yield can be obtained .
If 120 quintal garlic is sold at 1200 Rupees per quintal then 1,44,000 rupees will be obtained .
In this way daily 522 rupees of net income is obtained from one hector of garlic crop .
There are many hear-say stories famous about the origin of garlic .
One famous ancient story is that once Mother Lakshmi was drinking nectar .
At that time some drops of nectar fell on the earth and they froze in the form of garlic .
When all animals started getting immortality by eating garlic , then Lord Yama became worried and requested Lord Brahma that Lord , now nobody will die on the earth .
Then Lord Brahma filled foul smell in garlic and Gods declared it a devilish food .
The foul smell in garlic is due to a chemical named Allyl propyl disulphide .
The herb in which there are thousand virtues , we call that ` garlic ` .
Garlic gives man healthy body , shinning eyes , strong teeth , wonderful virility and long age .
Garlic is the nature gifted great medicine for the protection of mankind .
From last six thousand years it is being used for curing many diseases not only in our country but also in Italy , France , Germany , China , Greece , Egypt , Babylonia , Spain etc . .
According to the people of all these countries , by the use of garlic , -LRB- one -RRB- can stay away from diseases and problems of intestines , lungs , gas formation , worms of stomach , wounds on the body , skin diseases , infection in the breathing system etc . .
Greece , In ancient Greece a garland of garlic used to be put in the neck of a new born baby and paste of garlic used to be put on his lips and tongue .
In the same way the room of the pregnant woman also used to be decorated by garlands of garlic by which the mother can give birth to a healthy baby .
The natives of Rome used to daily feed garlic to make their soldiers strong and brave .
France - In the sixteenth century thousands of people from the French ports were saved from death by garlic only .
Due to the spread of the deadly disease of plague many people died , at that time it was found that garlic is a plague preventing spice and its use can save a plague patient .
According to Henry Calpedore of England , garlic is a poor man ` s medicine and many diseases can be controlled by this .
Garlic protects us from stomach pain , sore throat , disease of the throat , worms of stomach , headache and outbreak of plague .
In Ukraine one tonic is made from garlic which people use for long age , increase in beauty and retaining youthfulness .
According to them by regular use of garlic shine of face and the feeling of youthfulness remains and a person again feels like becoming of less age .
India - According to experts garlic is an unfailing cure for healing wounds and removing boils pimples .
The biggest reason for this is there are Vitamin C and sulphur in large quantities in garlic which are beneficial in healing wounds and burnt-cut areas and forming new skin .
It is known from research that a natural germicidal capacity is there in garlic .
It protects our body from many minute germs , fungus and virus which are dangerous for us and which spread many contagious disease .
According to preceptor Charak , if somebody chewing garlic consumes its juice everyday , then he always will stay healthy and he will never get any disease .
Black pepper is an important crop of spices .
Its plant is perennial , climbing creeper on which many small round fruits are borne .
The place of birth of black pepper is the area of western coast of Southern India .
It farming mainly is done in Kerala , Karnataka , Tamil Nadu but farmers have also started doing it on small scale in Pondichery , Andaman , Tripura , Maharashtra , Manipur , Odisha , Assam , Andhra Pradesh and West Bengal .
Apart from India its farming is done in Thailand , Bangladesh , Indonesia , Malaysia , Myanmar and neighboring country Sri Lanka .
Black pepper whose botanical name is Piper Nigrum , is a member of Piperaceae family .
Its plant is evergreen , perennial and creepery , for whose growth useful support is necessary .
The self-nutritious stems coming from creeper have apasthaanik roots .
These roots nicely clasp themselves to the adherent tree only to give support to the creeper .
In this plant flowering and fruition happens on its kaniya , slanting branches .
Among most varieties of black pepper the main is the unisexual variety .
Its flowers bloom from May to August .
Flowers are on the spikes of the plant in the form of bunches in the number of 30-150 .
It takes 6-8 months for the fruits to grow and ripen from the flower , meaning the fruits ripening get ready by December-February .
In areas of more rain and more cold , he flowers and fruits come late in this plant .
Black pepper is mainly tropical , perennial , creepery plant .
Its farming is done in the form of non-irrigated crop in such places where the average rainfall in up to 2500 m . m . and temperature remains 25 to 35 centigrade .
This can tolerate upto 10-40 centigrade temperature and its farming can be done up to the height of 1200 meter from sea level .
For this useful water draining , fertile , crumbly and deep soil is needed .
Likewise , its farming can be done from clayey moldy soil to sandy moldy soil also , but soil with lot of humus is most useful for it .
Likewise it can be grown in 5 to 5.5 P.H soil also .
Generally plants of black pepper are grown in grafts .
Prepare the graft from long stems of the shrubs of old black pepper plants only .
From the plants grown from the planted horizontal creepers . .
In I.B.A 50 P.P.M treated grafts , roots come more and quickly .
It is very difficult to grow black pepper from seeds because germination of seeds also happens very less .
There are almost more than 70 varieties of back pepper grown of which some are bisexual and some are uni-sexual .
Among them most famous are malabar varieties of south Kerala like kalluvazhi , balankotta , cheriakondy , uthirankota , karinkota .
Pannipur-1 : This variety was developed by doing hybrid of uthirankota and cheriakaniakadan varieties .
This is useful for various areas and give flowers quickly .
Recently Indian Spice Resaearch Institute , Calicut , Kerala has developed some better varieties of black pepper .
Srikara : This variety is best for Kerala and South Karnataka .
Its maximum dry yield is 2.67 ton per hector .
Shubhkara : Its development was also done by choosing method from karimunda variety .
Its maximum dry yield is 2.35 ton per hector .
Krishna : This is one free pollination variety whose development was done from balankotta variety .
From each creeper a yield of 4.94 kilo of green fruits is obtained .
Shyama : Its development is done by hybrid of uthirankota and cheriakaniakadan varieties .
All these black pepper are found to be useful for productive sector .
In them karimunda , veluthanamban , cheriakaniakadan , kuthiravally , chola , kariyulachi , chumala and kotha are famous .
In the malabar area of Karnataka state vorkaiyya marata , Doddagya , Karimarata , Arasilamarata , Malligesara and Tattisara of black pepper are famous .
For the farming of black pepper soil of newly cut farms of tea , cardamom and coffee is good .
Its sowing is started with the first shower of monsoon itself , in October-November only pits of 45X45X45 c.m size are dug at the distance of 3-4 meter .
These plants germinate in almost 4 weeks , then in July-August grafts of black pepper are implanted .
From close to the roots in the plants of black pepper some soil-strata like shoots grow .
The grafts are in the form of 2 to 4 long pieces of vestibule which are planted in nursery .
These pits are filled with fertile soil and compost .
Pits are not made in the southern and south western direction of the supporting trees .
In the farms of pure black pepper crop its plants are kept at a distance of 3-4 meter .
Black pepper creepers can be made to climb on coconut , mango , jack fruit and betel trees also and it is grown between the plants of cardamom , tea and coffee also .
After monsoon comes the supporting plans are cut from above once a year so that the plants are not affected by polu-fleas beetles .
In India in pure crop farms it is advised to put 10 kilogram cow dung fertilizer or compost , 5 kilogram ammonium sulphate , 1 kilogram single super phosphate and 100 gram muriate of potash per plant .
The fertilizers should be kept at the depth of 15 c.m in the pits dug near the concerned plants and at a distance of 30 c.m from the roots of the plants .
There is no standard way found for the cutting-harvesting of the plants of black pepper .
Maximum branches may come on each main creeper , for this , sufficient cutting-harvesting of the plant is done .
Mainly two insects attack black pepper : -LRB- 1 -RRB- polu-fleas beetle -LRB- 2 -RRB- apex shoots borer .
These destructive insects can be controlled by spraying 0.2 percent D.D.T one time in July-August and second time in October .
Prevention of slow wilt in the diseases of black pepper happens by spraying one percent bordeaux mixture in May-June and two times in September-October on the crop .
In hybrid variety Panniyur-1 fruits are borne in the second year only but in the seventh eighth year the plant starts giving full yield .
These fruits are borne in spikes and when one or two fruits become pink or red then the spikes are cut along with the fruits .
In the plains the fruits are cut from November to February .
The spikes along with the fruits are spread in a clean place , then crushing with legs they are separated from the spikes .
On drying , the fruits become light and in them special wrinkle of black pepper comes .
The white color black pepper is in much demand in foreign .
After this the upper soft layer and the pulp of the fruit are removed by rubbing with hands and the seeds are properly dried in the sun for 4-5 days .
After drying the seeds they are properly filtered and cleaned and they are made shiny by rubbing on a piece of cloth .
Normally in India the average yield of black pepper is only 250 k . g . per hector but by adopting the abovesaid procedures a farmers can obtain upto 900 to 1000 kilogram dried black pepper in one hector land .
Use of black pepper in the form of spice is prevalent for making both vegetarian and non-vegetarian types of food tasty and delicious in India and in other countries of the world .
Black pepper is used in the form of main ingredient in kadhi powder , chaat masala , pulao masala , chana masala , meat masala , sambhar masala etc . .
The essence of black pepper is used to make fragrant meat and liquor Scent and soap are also made from its perfume .
Black pepper is cough destroyer .
Black pepper is an unfailing medicine for many diseases also .
With daily use of black pepper indigestion and mental perturbation does not happen .
People of Egypt use oil of black pepper to prevent their corpses from decaying .
People from South-East Asia always use black pepper for keeping their sexual prowess high readily .
Now many types of Ayurvedic medicines are made from black pepper and even in western medicine it is being used .
Black pepper has the potential to prevent many pests-insects .
On storing wheat by mixing powder of black pepper -LRB- at the rate of 1000 p.p. m -RRB- for 36 months it does not get affected by weevil .
In the past quarter 184 trainings were organized by 11 agricultural science centers of the state working under the university from which 3892 farmers , women and rural youth were benefited .
Other than this , from the 8 trainings organized for the broadcasting employees of the linear department totally 143 broadcasting employees was trained .
Other than this , 3 farmer fairs , 1034 agriculture exhibitions , 368 farmer seminars were organized by the scientists working at the agricultural science centers by which totally 71,300 farmers were benefited .
16 farmer-useful articles written by scientists were published and 6 radio news and 31 television news were participated in .
During this time 509 farmers toured the agricultural science centers and 241 soil samples were also inspected in the agricultural science centers .
The agricultural science centers played an active role in forming 7 women member parties and 2 farm science clubs .
365 lectures were given by scientists by wich 22055 farmers were benefited and 4 animal camps were also organized by which 1114 animal rearers were benefited .
In the tatvaadhaan of the Directorate of Broadcasting Education a famous `` All India Farmers Fair and Agricultural Exhibition `` by the name ` Krishi Kumbha ` was organized on 6-9 March 2010 in the premises of the university .
Shri Bisht said that 75 percent of the land in the state is hilly and there is a lot of variety in the climate and geographical conditions here .
So only techniques have to be developed keeping this in mind and the direction of the research should change corresponding to the natural resources of the state .
He said that now such a farming is needed by which in less yield more profit is gained .
He said that the role of quality seeds is special in increasing of farm yield .
He appealed to the farmers to search for solutions of their farming related problems and seek information about new techniques through the medium of the fair .
In the fair different colleges of the university , national and international level firms putting up stalls exhibited products and techniques related to farming .
In the fair , exhibition and competition of fruits-flowers , vegetables and many other products , animal exhibition and competition , tillage competition and auction of hybrid calves was also organized .
A special lecture series was organized by keeping in mind the topic of this fair `` Synergistic Farming in the Context of the Changing Climate `` .
During the fair the farmers were specially interested in buying the quality seeds produced by the invention unit of the university .
On this occasion , being excited by high-tech farming , farmers showed their special interest in farming machines .
On the stall of Mahindra Tractor Sickle Sword -LRB- sugarcane cutting machine -RRB- manufactured by Brazil and Paddy Transplanter -LRB- paddy replanting machine -RRB- manufactured by Korea was the center of attraction of the farmers .
Harvesting of 7-8 acre of sugarcane can be done by sickle sword daily .
Its work efficiency is 20-30 tonnes per hour .
Korea manufactured paddy transplanter is capable of replanting one acre of paddy in 2.5-3 hours .
Manufacturing of safe and micro organic fuel with less than 86 percent green house emission through the medium of nano technique , stopping its damage by placing a damage free nano layer on the food items acquainted .
Other than this , stalls of various nationalized banks gave information about loans and other useful schemes for farmers .
Saying that small landholdings , lack of farming information and age-old marketing system are the important challenges of farming in hilly areas , he emphasized on making collective efforts in this directi .
Various products and techniques were exhibited by total 504 stalls along with 129 big stalls in the farmers fair and agricultural industry exhibition .
In the last quarter , meetings of the scientific advisory committees of the agricultural technology institutes situated in Champavat and Pithoragarh district were organized on 25 February , 2010 in Lohaghat Agricultural technology Center and on 26 February , 2010 in Gaina Anchalo Agricultural Technology Center .
During the meetings of the said scientific advisory committees , review of the progress of the last period was done and along with intense discussion on the strategy for agricultural development of the area , future action plan was also approved .
Honorable agriculture , agriculture education , agricultural marketing , animal husbandry , dairy development , fishery and horticulture minister Shri . Trivendra Singh Rawat visited and inspected agricultural technology center , Nainital -LRB- Jyolikot -RRB- on 27 January , 2010 , agricultural technology center , Champavat -LRB- Lohaghat -RRB- on 9 February ,2010 .
During the visit , he surveyed the crop exhibition displayed on the premises of the agricultural technology centers and a review was done of the activity of transfer of technology done by the centers for the benefit of the farmers .
The honorable minister described the work of the agricultural technology centers praiseworthy and appealed to the agricultural technology centers to make the technology transfer to far away areas in their districts more dynamic and effective .
In the past quarter 171 trainings were organized by 11 agricultural technology centers working under the university from which 3742 farmers , women and rural youth were benefited .
Under the advance line exhibition of crops , agricultural technology centers organized 192 advance line exhibitions in oilseed crops on 34.61 H . land , 308 in pulses crops on 37.83 H . land and 1086 in other crops on 123.90 H . land .
Agricultural Technology centers organized 11 domain days and 35 meetings of help groups , by which total 618 farmers were benefited .
In the domains of the agricultural technology centers oilseeds -LRB- 100.25 k. -RRB- pulses -LRB- 0.36 k. -RRB- , vegetable seeds -LRB- 0.36 k. -RRB- and sugarcane -LRB- 6539.62 k. -RRB- seeds were manufactured and making 1,45,648 saplings of fruits , vegetables , medicinal and decorative plants were distributed among the farmers .
During this , 356 farmers visited the agricultural technology centers and also studied 190 soil samples in the agricultural technology centers .
The agricultural technology centers played an active role in forming 2 women member parties and 9 farm science clubs .
In this training program discussion in detail was done on topics like current situation of agricultural marketing and the need to improve marketing in the changing environment , recognizing leadership development in farmers , use of information technology in agricultural marketing , farmer based processes of marketing under ATMA , ways of marketing education and partnership of farmers etc . .
Safe composition favorable to unseasonal vegetables like low-tunnel and poly house etc . can reap two to three times more yield than traditional farming .
Throughout the year obtaining various types of vegetables can be possible by safe vegetable production and due to unseasonal production farmer can get very high prices in the market .
On the occasion of inauguration -LRB- 27-30 January , 2010 -RRB- of training titled ` Use of information technology in farming ` Dr . Y.P.S Dabbas , Director , Sameti-Uttarkhan said that in the age of information revolution use of information technology is probably being done in every filed of human life like banking , agriculture , transport , environment , entertainment , education , business , etc . .
In information technology radio , television , computer , mobile , video conferencing , internet , portal , webpage , computer kiosk , tele medicine etc . are main .
The role of information technology is very important in agriculture .
After harvesting wheat , till the empty farming land deeply two-three times .
By which harmful pests and weeds present in the soil get destroyed .
Before putting the nursery of paddy , by immersing the seeds in 10 percent salt solution insects and infected seeds come on the surface of the water which should be separated by straining and use the healthy seeds .
To take a healthy crop of paddy , for a bed of 10 meter square , treat the soil mixing 50 to 100 grams of pant bio agent-3 along with 25 k.g cow dung .
After winter crop yield -LRB- ageti wheat -RRB- short term crops like green gram and cowpea can be taken before paddy .
Irrigation should be done in sugarcane crop as necessary .
In April month in the plains sow ginger , turmeric and yam and in the hilly areas potato .
In the May month in the hilly areas sow vegetables , peas and kidney beans .
For animal husbandry : - After harvesting and threshing winter crop there is a big change in the weather .
For solving the problem of green grass such a crop cycle should be adopted by which animals keep getting green grass .
For this interim crop is also an option like - corn in sugarcane , cowpea and green gram farming .
To increase the digestive power and nutrition of fodder , serve it by treating with 4 percent urea solution and molasses .
Give mineral mixture and salt to all animals in food regularly .
For protecting from heatstroke in summer keep the animals in a shady place under a tree or animal shelter and bathe and make drink lot of water .
On agricultural technology centers , Kashipur -LRB- Udhamsingh Nagar -RRB- , Dhanuri -LRB- Haridwar -RRB- , Dhakrani -LRB- Dehradun -RRB- and Lohaghat -LRB- Champawat -RRB- Arnet was inaugurated by honorable agriculture minister , Indian Government Shri Sharad Pawar on 21 April , 2010 through the medium of video conferencing from New Delhi .
By this facility , the scientists of these centers will be able to directly establish contact with Indian Agricultural Research Council through the medium of video conferencing .
Highland farming research and marketing interface workshop was organized under the chairmanship of Dr . Rajendra Prasad , Officiating Dean in Hill Agriculture and Forestry University , Ranichauri on 19 May , 2010 .
The main aim of organizing this workshop was to transfer the latest research findings quickly to the farmers through the medium of scientists of the Agricultural technology centers .
This workshop was presided over by Dr . R.P Singh , Associate Director -LRB- Tree safety -RRB- .
Total 4 trainings have been organized by State Agricultural Management and Extension Training Institute -LRB- Sameti-Uttarkhand -RRB- from the last quarter .
The attendees described these trainings as very beneficial .
For the progressive farmers and Farmer Advisory Committee a training tiled ` Agricultural Management Analysis in the Changing Climate and Use of Weather Information ` was organized on 27-30 April 2010 .
In this , information about the weather becomes very important .
Information about the weather come in front of us through newspapers , radio and doordarshan daily but we are not able to make use of these news .
If we make plans of the agricultural activities using weather forecast then it will be beneficial .
Total 21 trainees took part in this training .
A training program on `` technology and value added fruit production '' was organized on May-19-22 , 2010 for the members of the technical team of block level development .
For the Farmer Advisory Council and the members of the technical team at the development division level , a training titled ` Crop Protection Management -LRB- Kharif -RRB- ` was held on 08-10 June , 2010 .
Under this training , lectures were given on topics like major pests and disease management in summer crop , weed management and , major diseases of vegetables and management and , disease and insect management through bio process and trainees were given tour of bio-control lab and various research units .
Total 14 trainees took part in this training .
For the Farmer Advisory Council and the members of the technical team at the development division level , a training titled ` Broadcast according to the Market ` was held on 28-30 June , 2010 .
In the last quarter , the Training and Touring Unit of the Broadcasting Education Directorate organized total 27 training programs sponsored by various government departments , self help organizations , private and public firms and projects .
Total 725 trainees got benefited by these training programs .
Most trainings were of three days to weekly also .
The total time duration of these training programs was 117 days .
The tourists got information about the new agricultural techniques from the university and bought improved seeds of grains , vegetables and flowers , literature on fruits , trees , plants and agricultural technology .
For agriculture : - For controlling weeds in grains use butachlor at the rate of 50 e . c . 3.0 litre or Anilophas 30 e . c . 1.65 litre amount per hector before 3-4 days from sowing .
For controlling black spots on apples and pears spray zineb or blitox 50 .
In grains spray first 1 part of nitrogen in the form of urea at the time when shoots burst out and second 1 part before the flowers come on the spikes .
Sow the quick ripening varieties of black gram and green gram from mid July to first week August .
Do sowing of coleseed till August mid .
In the plains , sow crop of ageti potato and peas for vegetable in the August month .
For animal husbandry : - In the month of July and August there is a possibility of outbreak of various contagious diseases like enteritis , diarrhea , viral fever , throat choke , mouth ulcers - foot ulcer , etc . .
On outbreak of these treat according to the advice of the veterinary .
Feed mother ` s milk -LRB- colostrum -RRB- to the new born baby equal to 10 percent of its body weight at an interval of 3 to 4 hours four to five times by which disease resistance develops in the baby .
If the new baby becomes an orphan then in place of colostrum , preparing a mixture of 15-20 m.l castor oil , one egg of chicken and 1 litre milk feed it three or four times making a dose .
There is more possibility of spreading of contagious diseases in the monsoon .
So pay attention to the cleanliness of the animals and their dwelling .
In Uttarakhand total declared forest area is 64.79 percent but according to the state forest report-2005 in reality only 45.70 percent of total land in the state is covered with forest .
Due to reduction in the forest area , imbalance of circumstances has been created because of which there has been an increase in natural disasters like famine , flood and earthquake .
Trees absorbing carbon dioxide collect dangerous carbon .
Trees planted in one hector absorb six tons carbon dioxide every year .
It is necessary for this earth and the creatures dependent on it that jungles increase fast .
By the process of transpiration its roots absorb water from the ground in such high quantities that the danger of water level dropping arises .
Acacia tree which is famous by the name titled ` Tree of the poor ` grows very fast and its stalk is very hard by which it is suited for burning .
Its seeds give rise to its jungles in other places also by the process of dispersion .
Probably because of its qualities it is planted in waste unused land , watershed and slopes etc . places .
By putting pipes in the hills , as much loss this species has inflicted on the system of the nature there , that much no other has .
Because of this the balance of the cycle of weather has gone haywire .
So it is necessary that good plants should be planted so that environment stays unpolluted and our health stays fit .
Along with peepal all traditional Indian shady trees like neem , tamarind , paakad , blackberry , mango , banyan and quince have the ability to improve the environment .
Their fruits and leaves mixing with the ground improve its fertility .
Mango , neem , peepal , mahua etc . are regional and useful varieties for the flat lands of north India .
Shady and oxygen giving trees like peepal , banyan , neem , arjun and blackberry should be planted on the sides of the roads .
In agriculture forestry , for economic use , other than mango , guava , amla , for wood , planting of poplar tree is also in accordance with the environment .
Other than these big trees profitable from the viewpoint of environment and business , there are many such medicinal plants which are proving to be beneficial from the viewpoint of finance .
Medicinal and aromatic plants like basil , asparagus , chebula , aloe vera are effective in controlling the pollution of the environment .
Planting of good plants is necessary .
Along with planting of good plants , a system to take care of them also should be developed in which there is a system of auditing of tree planting with partnership of local people .
Keeping our environment clean , safeguard us from the dangerous outcomes of the change in climate and in their shade thousands of varieties of creatures may breathe .
For solution of the problem of pests and diseases in the crop of grains , one group of scientists of the university to know the problems toured Lekhipur and neighboring villages of district Udhamsingh Nagar , Gadarpur Development Area on 14 July , 2010 .
Biggest infliction of the stalk borer insect was found in the crop , saying whose solution the scientists said that because in the lowland areas the summer crop of grains is being taken in large quantities the infection of the stalk borer insect is increasing while as in earlier years this type of problem was not there in the lowland areas .
For its solution the scientists advised not to encourage summertime crop of grain .
From the last 25 years due to the on going problem of termites the remote village of Lambadi of the Sealdah development area of district Almora is on threshold of becoming barren .
During this time insect repelling medicines related to the control of termites was sprayed in the village and 3 people from the village were given special training of the technique of spraying the medicine .
For the solution of the problem of termites , Gharda Chemicals , Mumbai made available insect repelling chemicals free of cost .
During the tour it was found that the areas in which farming of pumpkin class of vegetables is being done for many years continuously , in them , this problem is most serious .
For the solution of this problem scientists advised to adopt crop cycle and had discussions regarding other solutions with the local farmers .
Mushroom is a pure vegetarian edible item whose farming can be started inside the house with less capital .
In it , along with huge amounts of digestive protein , mineral salt , vitamins , necessary amino acids etc . nutrients , medicinal properties are also found .
In spite of being full of all these qualities its production is done by very less farmers while as the geographical conditions in district Champavat are very favorable for farming of mushroom .
In the training along with the technique of production , information of making special dishes of mushroom was also given .
Expectation is that in future other unemployed youths of the district also adopting this on a business scale will make it a means of self employment .
In the last quarter , total 3 trainings were organized by the State Agriculture Management and Extension Training Institute , Uttarakhand -LRB- sameti-Uttarakhand -RRB- .
For the members of the technical team at the development area level a training titled ` Animal Wealth and Dairy Management ` was organized on 12-14 August , 2010 .
On the occasion of the inauguration of the training , Director , Extension Training and Sameti-Uttarakhand , Dr . Y.P. Dabbas referring to the geographical conditions of the hilly areas said that along with small a farmer can take care of his family properly by domesticating one or two animals .
He said that in hilly areas where 90 percent women do the work of grazing-feeding the animals , in such a situation , farmers need to be more alert towards animal husbandry .
For the members of the technical team -LRB- B.T. T -RRB- at the development area level , a training titled ` Training alertness needed for the master trainers ` was organized on 26-28 August , 2010 .
This is possible only when they are given correct and effective training .
A symposium on training assessment and problems of agricultural training was organized by the attendees .
This situation is not only in agriculture but also in all allied areas animal husbandry , fishery , sericulture , etc . .
Farmers are experiencing difficulty in changing the traditional form of farming .
So for making alert the broadcasting employees , decentralization of decision power , production according to demand , domain business , including maximum agents in both private and public sectors in deciding the capability of the farmer community .
In broadcasting management participation of local people is needed , so good relations have to be established with them , their needs and hardships should be studied by which good co-operation of all the people at the local level can be obtained for the work of broadcasting .
For inspection of the broadcasting system and bringing uniformity in the programs , there is always a need for co-ordination within the broadcasting system .
These trainings that were organized were related to agricultural diversification , soil testing and refurbishing , poultry , durable farming and vegetable production and animal husbandry .
788 trainees were benefited by these trainings .
Most trainings were of three days to weekly .
The tourists obtained knowledge about the new agricultural techniques developed by the university and bought improved seeds -LRB- grains , vegetables and flowers -RRB- and plants -LRB- fruit trees -RRB- and agricultural technology literature .
In October for controlling tikka disease in groundnut spray mencozeb at the rate of 2 kg or zineb 75 percent soluble powder 2.5 kg per hector mixing in water .
For controlling sudion in soyabean , spray indosulphan at the rate of 35 e.c of 1.5 litre amount mixing in 1000 litre water per hector .
Definitely finish the sowing canola and mustard in the first fortnight of October .
In the hilly areas sow red lentils from mid October to first week of November .
Do sowing of potato , radish , carrot , turnip , garlic in October month .
To prevent root borer insect in peach , plums and apricot , making a solution of chloropyriphos -LRB- 4 m.l.  10 litre in water -RRB- irrigate in saucers .
Uttarakhand state is very useful for agricultural diversification from the geographical and ecological viewpoint .
Here there are many opportunities of growth in areas like unseasonal vegetables , horticulture based business and livestock .
In Uttarakhand because agriculture suitable land is less , animal husbandry is important from the viewpoint of business and employment .
Other than this , sheep , goat , angora kids and chicken rearing are beneficial businesses which are not proving to be beneficial due to unscientific ways of operation and other reasons .
From animals other than getting milk , ghee , meat , wool , eggs , we get animal power for working on the farms .
In keeping the animals healthy , animal fodder has a large contribution .
Hilly farmers know some things about balanced animal fodder .
But because of geographical disparity most farmer brothers are not able to produce crops of green fodder and animals do not get filling fodder .
Very few farmers are such who understand the importance of mineral salts in animal fodder .
So very little amount of mineral salts reach the bodies of the animals eating this fodder , while as mineral salts are very necessary for various bodily activities .
Mineral salt mixtures in the form of brick shaped lumps are found in the market which can be kept in the enclosures of the animals .
Other than this animal rearers also have to pay special attention to diseases of the animals .
When animals drink water from the pits , waterfalls or river or eat the grass grown near by them then above said insects enter the stomach , intestines or liver of the animals .
So offer them clean water and let them graze in a good place .
Prevention of all these outer or inside parasites in animals is very necessary .
Only then your animals will stay healthy and farmers can get more benefit from them .
In the hilly regions , lack of drinking water and water for irrigation , has come forth in the form of a serious problem .
Due to increase in average temperature and annual offering of jungles in bigger areas to fire , the cover of vegetation is getting destroyed .
Due to all these reasons , moisture from the soil is getting vanished , because of which crops in in-irrigated areas especially summer crops are getting destroyed due to famine .
We will have to do restoration of naturally available streams and holes so that availability of water for farming continues by which ground water gets recharged , as a result level of water table will not go down .
Due to desertion by non use of plough in the farm land , land is becoming hard and barren .
So as far as possible , the tendency of the farm land becoming barren should be stopped .
Increase in bio constituents in agricultural land is possible by fertilizer of decayed dung and leaves and wormy compost etc . .
Such a land has better capacity to retain rain water and moisture stays for long .
Cheap alkathin tanks can be very useful in collecting rain water in farms and houses .
This collected water can be put to use in a situation of drought for irrigation of crop -LRB- irrigation by drip process -RRB- .
In this way if all the departments in the region also together making a long term plan implement these programs then undoubtedly increasing the yield , -LRB- they -RRB- will be able to stop the agricultural land from being barren and along with that will be able to protect the environment also .
Under the auspices of Broadcasting Training Directorate , the famous 89th All India Farmers fair named ` Krishi Kumbh ` and grand organization of agricultural production exhibition was done in the premises of the university on March 9-12 , 2011 .
Along with that , it was said , to reduce the efforts of women in the region giving of useful agricultural equipments and more attention to be given to increase the production of milk and meat .
Dr. Singh said that in the 12th five year plan sending lead farmers of the country abroad information on new techniques will be given .
Dr. Singh also expressed necessity of sowing crops of quick time varieties of green gram , black gram and cowpeas along with sugarcane to increase the yield of pulses crop by which along with yield , fertility of the soil will also increase .
Calling the big grains sown in Uttarakhand and other regions as crop of the future , he urged the scientists to increase its yield capacity from now only .
He also said about doing efforts by the university for encouraging environment friendly farming along with expanding collective farming .
In the fair , along with various colleges of the university , national and international firms putting up stalls exhibited farming related products and techniques .
For the entertainment of the farmers everyday evening cultural programs were also organized .
Other than this , through the stalls of various nationalized banks and insurance companies , information about loans for farmers and other useful schemes was also given .
Praising the various varieties especially corn , wheat , sugarcane , paddy etc . developed by the university , he said that due to the efforts of this university only today the country is replete with food .
Along with 9000 registered farmers almost 42 , 000 visitors toured the fair .
