A film titled ' Swadeshi Andolan ' was showcased in the Town Hall of Kolkata on 22 September 1905.
Historians consider it to be the first film of India.
In it there was a picture of some leading men associated with the domestic movement.
Jamshedji Framji Madan is an important name in the history of Indian Film History.
Madan is the first Indian,who in 1902 began bioscope show by pitching a tent in an open ground of Kolkata.
Abdul Yusuf Ali of Surat initiated tourist cinema in the country.
A film ` The life of Christ ` was showcased in 1910 in American-Indian P.B. Mehta ` s theatre.
In 1912 Ramchandra Gopal Torane (Dada Saheb Torane)made the first feature film ` Pundalik ` .
When the trend of silent cinema was prevailing, then we were not tied in the bond of any language.
As our steps set off from silent towards talking cinema, some alterations came in the presentation of song-music.
Artists performing onscreen themselves would sing in accordance with the scene and instrumentalists would play hiding in some bushes or camps.
In the decade of thirties many new experiments were performed in the history of hindi cinema of which one we know as playback singing.
R.C. Boral was born in a famous musician family on 19 October 1903.
His father Lalchand Boral was a famous Pakhavaj player of that time.
He deserves the credit of being the first musical cartoon film maker along with being the first music composer who began playback singing.
` Bhulere Sheshe ` , ` Lakh Taka ` , and ` Bhola Master ` are there in the three cartoon feature films produced by him.
R.C. Boral died on 25 November 1981.
Two Dada Saheb were born in the history of Indian Film history.
One Ramchandra Gopal Torne aka dada Saheb Torne and second, Dhundiraj Govind Phalke aka Dada Saheb Phalke.
There is a lot of similarity in both of them.
First this that both were from Maharashtra.
Both fanatical art lovers associated with theatre and their willpower was also similar.
Spread and development of cinema in India was included in important priorities of both.
If we talk about Dada Saheb Phalke then even he wanted to make a film on Ram or Krishna.
But even he had the same problem as Dada Saheb Torne had , of money.
Here both of them had problems, of money and of artists, especially there was an acute shortage of female artists.
Forget about women working in films during those days bringing any art from on stage was considered a sign of uncivilised behaviour.
After a lot of churning Phalke made up his mind to film mythological tale of Satyavadi Raja Harishchandra.
Approximately two months later returned to India on 1 April 1912 after receiving training in film production from London.
He brought along raw negative film also with Williamson camera, printing, processing machine.
Encountered one gentleman who got ready to help financially.
As soon as money problem was solved came the turn of selection process of characters.
Phalke wanted that this role should only be played by some female artist.
The attempt was wasted, even a prostitute refused to come in front of the camera.
Eventually it was decided that this role will be made to play by a male artist only.
Search began as to who that man will be anyway?
After continued attempts since many days his eyes fell on a cook in an Iranian restaurant.
His postures were somewhat like women.
That cook became the first actress of the film able to receive the designation of first feature film of India, whose name was ` Salunke ` .
No less effort was invested for the role of third important character Rohitashch (son of Harishchandra and Taramati)in this story.
Seeing no alternative finally Phalke made his son Bhalachandra Phalke play this role.
He again had to face financial problem while moving towards the last stage of shooting.
In this time of crisis the only help was provided by his wife Kaki Phalke.
Kaki Phalke gave strength to complete this film by selling off all her jewellery leaving alone a Mangalsutra.
After this much sacrifice and struggle this film was successfully completed.
Its press show was held in Mumbai on 21 April 1913.
It is in this press show that he revealed that name of this film is ` Raja Harishchandra ` .
In 18 May 1913 ` Raja Harishchandra ` was also released in that very Coronation Theatre where, about a year before this date ` Pundalik ` was released.
Audiences liked it a lot, this film ran in Coronation theatre for 23 days continuously.
In human history many such great people have been born the correct assessment of whose contribution could not be done during their lifetime.
Counting of Gurudutt the immortal producer, director and actor of Hindi cinema is also done among such great people.
Within a few years after his death he was counted amongst the greatest people of world cinema.
Without Gurudutt the list of top notch film producers of India is meaningless.
Not only this, today any famous international film festival is considered incomplete without showcasing Gurudutt ` s films.
Special screenings of Gurudutt ` s films have been organised in almost all prestigious international film festivals.
Times magazine included his name in world ` s 100 greatest film personalities.
Many books have been written on his life and achievements in Hindi, English, Bangla, Marathi, Kannada, Gujarati and other languages.
In his lifetime his films received National award and Filmfare award also and they were appreciated in film festivals as well.
Gurudutt was born in Bangalore (now Bengaluru) on 9 July , 1925.
His father was a teacher in Bangalore but in 1930 he took up a job in Burma oil ocmpany and began to live in Kolkata.
In this way Gurudutt ` s childhood was spent in Bengal.
Both Gurudutt ` s parents were of artistic interest, therefore he received literary and artistic values in family itself.
His maternal uncle Balakrishna Benegal laid a great impact on his sensitive mind.
He only took him towards films.
Gurudutt passed his matriculation in 1941 at the age of 13.
To help in household expenses he began to work at a Marwari ` s shop.
in the year 1942 he received entry in the dance institute of famous dancer Udayshankar and he went to Almoda.
Very soon due to his dedication and fascination for dance he became Udayshankar ` s favourite student.
Gurudutt also played a short role in the film Kalpana produced by Udayshankar.
Around that very time Gurudutt ` s father got transferred in Mumbai and they began to reside in Matunga with family.
The string of Gurudutt ` s dance training and performance continued in Mumbai also.
During this time only Gururdutt developed interest in films and he saw many films.
he also went to Chennai to get work in films but after being unsuccessfulreturned to Mumbai.
It is then that his maternal uncle introduced him to Prabhat Studio ` s partner Baburam Pai and he was employed in Prabhat as an art director.
It was in Prabhat only that he met Devanand and Rehman.
It was there only that Dev Anand promised Gurudutt that if he ever makes a film then he will hand its direction to Gurudutt.
In the year 1944 he entered the field of acting and played roles in films Chaand and Lakharani.
After some time he got a chance in the film ` Hum Ek Hain ` .
He was also made co-director of this film.
Gurudutt was also the dance director of the film.
Gurudutt again came on streets after Prabhat studio was shut down.
After making rounds of many studios he got work in the recently opened Fames pictures and studio as an assistant of Anadinath Banerjee.
Then he went to Bombay talkies and became co-director to Gyan Mukherjee, director of super hit film Kismat.
Songs and music of the film were also very popular.
During the recording of songs for Baazi only Gurudutt and Geeta Roy came near to each other and their introduction changed into nuptial knot.
After this Gurudutt established his independent film production company ` Gurudutt films ` and made Aar Paar under its banner.
This was the first film in which he played the role of director and producer along with that of actor.
There was freshness as well in the story.
In 1955 he made a comic film by the name of Mr. and Mrs.55 in which he exposed the women who claimed to be social reformists.
For the film ` s screening he went to Hyderabad.
He was extremely impressed by Whaeeda Rahman ` s dance and beauty and signed her for his next film CID upon meeting her.
He signed a contract for 5 years with Waheeda.
The cine world will be indebted to Gurudutt for the discovery of the empress of talented and natural beauty like Waheeda Rahman.
After that began the period of grand and classic films.
In 1957 only he made masterpeice Pyaasa.
This film was supreme in every aspect like acting, songs-music,photography, dialogues, direction etc and became superhit.
He knew English , Kannada , Hindi , Bengali, Marathi and Urdu languages.
He was fond of Bengali literature since childhood only.
Along with his own films Gurudutt played lead role in some other films as well.
He was playing the role of Majnu in K. Asif ` s film Love and God but due to death the film was left incomplete.
Later Sanjeev Kumar played that role.
As much as Gurudutt remained transparent in his personal life,his death was equally mysterious.
At 6 a.m. on 10 October, 1964 he was found dead in his flat on Peddar road.
His elder brother stated that his brother committed suicide while his son Arun Dutt called it an accident.
Being a skillful director he accurately recognised Indian audiences ` interest towards music.
Gurudutt has given a lot to the world in the form of a good human being and successful actor and film producer.
Anil Kapoor who rose as a star in the decade of 1980 had actually worked as a child actor in three films.
These three film were ` Shatranj ` , ` Humaare Tumhaare ` and ` Shakti ` .
But the truth was that Anil Kapoor did not received any success as a child actor .
With bag in hands Anil Kapoor used to roam from one city to the other .
Anil Kapoor himself used to tell producers - directors that he wanted to be an actor .
Finally after difficult struggle Anil Kapoor got an opportunity to play hero in ` Vo 7 din ` and this film was released in 1983 .
This first film of Anil Kapoor was a success but he was not getting new films easily .
Somehow he got two films ` Andar Bahar ` and ` Love marriage ` but both of them were unsuccessful .
Anil Kapoor ` s struggle became more difficult .
` Pyar kiya hai pyar karenge ` was also a successful film but could not make Anil Kapoor a star .
Finally ` Mr. India ` made Anil Kapoor a star in 1987 .
This was the biggest hit film of Anil Kapoor ` s career till then .
Indian media and entertainment industry are one of the fastest developing industries .
Initially where there was only one channel named Doordarshan under the control of government, now there are four hundred channels working countrywide .
More than one thousand films are made in various languages in India and there are approximately more than 10,000 cinema halls .
Where this industry was of Rs. 58 , 080 Crore in the year 2009 now by 2005 it was of 35,650 crores .
In this way the growth rate from 2005 to 2009 was 13 percent .
The Indian market of television is growing .
Every passing year new channels are being launched and after recession of 2009 now growth rate of advertising has come to two units .
Now the government is paying its full attention to digitalisation .
Now there are 6 big companies in the distribution sector which are separate from DD Direct .
Only one company was there in 2003 in this field .
The percentage of digital cable customers is going down although for digitalisation the government has set guideline rules countrywide .
Whenever the work for digitalisation is over there will be transparency in the entire network and manifold increase in the revenue .
9 crore copies of newspapers are broadcast in India and this is one of the largest spread in the entire world .
It is at second position after China .
It will be wrong to say no attempts have been undertaken for digitisation in India and readers were not given online newspaper .
But enough progress has not been achieved in this direction .
There is online presence of most newspapers and its readers are also increasing .
But newspaper readers of India like to read newspapers for news, not internet .
Nowadays majority of media and entertainment industry sector are paying attention to entering in small towns .
during the year 2009 development of newspaper industry has decreased but regional newspapers increased and became local .
The development of newspapers increased in the year 2010 and their share in gross income from advertisements also rose .
Apart from this the interest of advertisers increased towards newspapers of second and third grade .
Newspaper industry is understanding the importance of this matter and is initiating its editions in specialised fields .
The biggest challenge in front of print media is the expenditure of newsprint .
The cost of newsprint is a major factor of newspaper income .
Films in India are a popular medium for entertainment .
In the case of films made every year, Indian film industry is among the big countries of the world .
But Indian film industry had to see rainy days of 2009-2010 for two years contiguously and its development stopped .
Its major reason was the lack of good films .
Box office ` s income was effected due to closing down of one screen theatres and IPL season of cricket .
Number of good films being made till during 2010 remained very less .
Maximum radio industrialists of today are associated with big media houses .
Initially radio programs were restricted to radio sets .
Now FM is being heard through mobile phones .
Recently in central cabinet permission for development of third stage of FM radio has been granted .
One major challenge for radio industry is to get to know the number of its audiences .
Music , publicity outside home , Internet advertising , animation , gaming and visual effects are included in the other sections of media and entertainment industry .
A big portion of income coming from music in India comes from film music .
The sale of independent music albums is quite less .
Animation and gaming industry in India increased in 2004-05 .
Gaming is growing rapidly despite challenges .
Social networking has proved to be a boon for gaming industry and many online consumers have become addicted to it .
Nowadays there is tremendous inclinations towards social networking as well and it is increasing wildly .
It is making the consumer more aware .
Share of advertisements in Gross Domestic Production in India is mere 0.53 percent whereas in America it is 1.08 percent and 0.09 percent in Japan .
With this we get a hint that there are many possibilities of growth in this area .
Rani said that I have no problem with any Khan in fact I have learnt a lot from all the three Khans .
Shahrukh and Aamir have taught me a lot .
Shahrukh has always been very supportive and as a co-star he has always taught me that how should one work better .
Aamir has been like my teacher .
When i had begun my career then he had taught me form the very basic how to improve acting.
I am also doing Talaash film with him and even now I feel that I have to learn a lot from him .
Rani also admired Salman .
She said that Salman Khan is a very good friend of mine .
I have a very good and different bonding with all the three Khans and I know all the Khans like me a lot .
Rani Mukherji had previously worked in Ghulam film with Asmir .
Rani and Aamir ` s career have seen a lot of ups and downs from this film till now .
Both now perform very mature and untangled characters .
Rani had done Chori Chori Chupe Chupke film with Salman Khan and with Shahrukh Rani ` s pair is one the hit pairs of bollywood .
Both have worked in hit films like Kuchh Kuchh Hota hai, Chalte Chalte .
Now the question that arises is that if Rani ` s film Aiyya will be bale to gather crowd at box office .
Rani ` s this film Aiyya is releasing in October .
The good thing is this that opposite Rani there is no film of a big star .
Yes , Preity Zinta ` s film Ishq in Paris will definitely fight with her film .
Otherwise also Rani Mukherji and Preity Zinta ` s cat fight is pretty old in bollywood and now once more they are facing each other .
Because of this reason there is expectation of a fierce tiff between them .
Karan Johar is that name of the film industry, to work with whom every artist yearns .
Today whichever Khan he wants, can make him a part of his films .
He considers only those films a success which can be remembered for a long time .
Before this good story with good music was considered important for success in Bollywood .
Now along strong direction with a good script is the real strength with which you can rule bollywood without a star as well .
There is no big star in Karan Johar ` s film Student of the year .
All are debutantes but association of Karan Johar ` s name with this film makes the film big in itself .
In this Mahesh Bhatt ` s daughter Aliya, director David Dhawan ` s son Varun, Siddhart Malhotra and Boman Irani ` s son Kayoz are acting .
Kajol ` s presence in Karan ` s film has almost become a tradition .
Karan ` s statement is that he does not want to break this tradition because I am a man who works on habits .
Eid is to Salman ` s name , Diwali to Shahrukh ` s name and Aamir ` s film talaash will be released around Christmas .
So in a way these Khans have claimed Indian festive seasons to their name so there is no place left for the rest of the directors .
Eventually 19 October was the date left when Karan was compelled to release this film .
Crores of rupees have been invested in Indian film industry .
Here lakhs of people get direct or indirect unemployment .
Different from this is the story of the birth of film industry .
Loui Lumite and his brother exhibited six silent films at Watson Hotel of Mumbai on 7 July, 1886 .
After watching these silent films strong interest was produced in these people on these subjects .
As a result H.M. Bhatavedekar in Mumbai and Heeralal Sen in Kolkata made many short silent films .
The credit of making first complete silent film Raja Harishchandra in India goes to Dada Saheb Phalke (Dhundiraj Govind Phalke) .
Phalke was an extraordinary dilettante .
He was film producer, dialogue writer, cameraman and distributor all .
He is called father of Indian film industry .
After Raja Harishchandra he made many films .
In the beginning of the decade of twenties 27 films per year began to be made .
During these days itself production of articulate films began .
Initially maximum films were made in Hindi .
After this films began to be made in Bengali, Oriya, Assamese, Marathi, Tamil, Telegu, Kannada and other languages as well .
In the year 1931 Ardeshar Irani produced the first vocal film Aalamara in the country .
People exhibited interest in this new medium of amusement .
Therefore cinema houses were established in almost all cities of the country and swiftness came in film production .
There were only seven songs in Aalamara .
In Indrasabha their number increased to 71 .
After some time that a film was made on Sharat ` s novel Devdas .
This film changed people ` s interest .
A tremendous change was seen in the presentation and dialogues of films in the decade of thirties .
Devaki Bose, V. Shanta Ram , Sohrab Modi and Mehboob have made many good films .
Among these Maya, Achhut kanya, Duniya na Mane, Adhikaar, Vidyapati are noteworthy .
A tremendous increase in film production took place in film production in the decade of thirties .
During this time India also had to deal with worldwide recession .
Soon after being over recession second world war started .
During the war this point was agreed upon that films can become a major medium for publicity and to construct public opinion .
Many constructions were done to encourage war efforts .
Money rained in film industry .
During this time only import of films to foreign nations began in limited number .
Some time after this Mohan Bhavani made film Vasantsena based on famous Sanskrit play Mricchakatika .
Its next year Irani made one more colour film Mother India .
Production of colour films in the country at a big scale began in the decade of fifties .
To attract people ` s attention these were full of love scenes, emotions , sensational incidents .
Rarely any film was made on serious social problems, life struggles and problems of downtrodden , farmers and tribals .
In the decade of fifties film inspection committee was constituted to bring improvement in film industry , to increase its standards and to provide it with strength .
Finance corporation was established to arrange finances for the production of good films .
To promote production of good films in big cities of the country film societies were established .
Crucial help was received in raising the standards of Indian films with this contribution of government .
Indian cinema , its market and influence today is not concentrated till the frontiers of the nation only .
It has made a place for itself in the world cinema market as well and is working to strengthen its grasp .
Cinema is such a medium whose influence is two sided .
On one side it influences country ` s language , culture and society also gets influenced by them .
If we throw a glance at the history of world cinema then one comes to know that first time cinema was eexhibited in Grand cafe of Paris on 28 December, 1895 .
Then was it was named as cinematography .
After six months of this only Indian people got the opportunity to see cinema for the first time .
In the advertisement published in the newspapers of that time it was given names like miracle of the century and world ` s wonder .
Indian cinema has entered not only the countries of Europe and America but till South America , Africa , Australia and New Zealand .
With development and availability of means of telecommunication - mobile phone and facilities like 3G this medium is now entering everywhere .
With this there are possibilities of influence area of cinema increasing more .
Even today traditional methods are employed to arrange investment in this business .
In it a part of available numbers of investment and business can be kept in the domain of speculations .
In investment in this business even today there is importance of unofficial investment area .
In the initial stage of film production usually this business would come through family and contacts .
It was that time when film was seen as a medium of social reforms instead of business.
There was arrangement of providing funds to artists working in films and this amount was limited to hundreds and thousands only .
This period was not of big budget films .
But in them aspects of story, art and music were given more importance in comparison to earning profit .
In this profession the system of investing money on a big scale moved forward rapidly along with making of multi-starrer films .
In the partnership of investment and profit instead of banking area other ways are used at big scale even today .
A new period of regulation has begun of this industry after the entry of big companies and corporate in this business.
This is being done in a more professional way since after professional managers became partners in this work.
Ways of watching film have also changed along with changing India .
Cinema houses have not remained limited to entertainment only .
They along with shopping mall tradition have become an inseparable part of entertainment ` s entire market .
Today India has become such a nation where maximum films are produced int he world .
Apart from Hindi , audiences of films being made in other Indian languages have the largest number in the world .
At this moment nationwide in the world of cinema around 20 lakh poeple have received employment directly or indirectly.
Indian cinema market has been estimated as around two and a half American dollars .
they are attempted to be made to be worth filling front rows through violence , crime and popular music
The experts of this profession claim that rate of fees of celebrity actors is increasing each year .
Official information about which actor received how much money for which film is not generally available .
Both those who pay money and those who receive do not supply official information about this .
But figures like these are made available by people associated with market and professional area .
For one film five crores or even more than that is also paid .
Direct influence of film industry and its business is being laid on management and development of television and radio especially FM channels .
In this age Indian film world has not only maintained its topicality in fact is looking for opportunities to move ahead from this .
Today foreign producers and directors are coming forth to make movies on India and subjects of Indian background .
Undoubtedly there are professional aspects to this collaboration and adjustment , they are extremely important from the view point of industry and business .
Radhe Krishna, Radhe Krishna, is someone there? see brothers! this shopkeeper is beating up Kunwar ji.
Sir I am your servent .
Oh yes you only asked me to massage .
Oh yes, I had only asked you to massage, I am so weird!
Hey people, u should now get going! There is no fault of Pandit ji in this .
Say , did you see any girl for me ?
Bhola! in the afternoon of this summer
You are young , it is your age to enjoy , go to some garden and read Chandrakanta or Behraam Daaku or Presmshastra while sitting under a tree .
Uncle, you always teach me bad habits .
गंदी-गंदी बातें हम भी अजीब हैं , मगर हमने कौन सी गंदी बात सिखाई है ।
Then why did you took the name of Premshastra?
I am weird, Premshastra is name of a book which all young people read .
If you do not want to read then don ` t read but get out of this suffocating air .
Son what is the use of having a garden at a river bank near home , go to the garden and come back after taking in fresh air .
But I have eaten stomach full uncle!
My naive newphew you are innocent to the core , one makes health with a walk .
बनती भी है और बिगड़ती भी है।
Oh it won ` t be spoiled, am I not saying it .
Okay , if you say so I will go .
You are here till now , very good get some fishes , good good .
Caught, I caught some fresh fat fish!
Oh-oh this is some mermaid .
Oh so you inserted this line to catch some mermaid .
I came to catch some fish .
Sir, since yesterday you have been looking at this picture all the while .
Hey Hajuri ! Some face itself is like that the entire is left open .
Now I have made a decision that I will surely make her the mistress of the house .
If parents of the mistress do not agree ?
I am weired i will send Bhole sir to garden .
Bhole ! I am a Rajpoot whoever I leave once leave for ever .
If you are a rajpoot then I am also a rajpoot .
How can I leave my aunt , she has brought me up like a kid .
Hey Bhola its you! Hey how come you are carrying luggage , is your uncle fine ?
What will happen to uncle he is getting young with each passing day .
I am saying right aunt that is why I have come here after leaving that home .
Hey then who will take care of him ?
There is someone coming to take care of her , new aunt .
Madhava uncle this house in front was vacant wasn ` t it ?
Bhole ! till the time we all dont see that girl together you cannot fall in love with that girl .
Bhole! what time will this window open ?
Oh how hot it is Radha! Please open this window a bit .
I swear you if Ihave to break a bow I will break a bow as well .
Sir! why don ` t we teach Bhola music ?
Now I am 26 years old ! will learn in two days sir .
Bhole ! do you remember lyrics of any film ` s song ?
Bhole ! I will sing this son , you move lips , as if you are singing ! My voice your face , you understand .
He considers himself a big singer , he is not even the dust of my master ` s shoe .
I will teach him such a lesson , such a lesson that he will forget all notes .
Did you hear ? everything has been messed up .
With so much love had she come to the window , had locked her eyes with mine .
Wanted to talk to me and you closed the door and poor she went away sulking .
Master ! Oh-oh where were you ?
Haven ` t seen your face since a week , do you know how bad my condition became .
Your condition is not good for me !
I had gone to Rameshwaram , while coming back God gave me fruit as well .
Which fruit ! Ramfal , Seetafal , tell me what was the need ot go there ?
I did a mistake I will not go again , if i go i ` ll tak eyou along .
Alright come fast , make us hear a powerful song on harmonium first .
What is the need of a song , first we will talk and then I will sing a song .
Oh-oh , your talks go to hell , first sing a song .
Oh what will he sing ? tell him to ring bells in the temple , bells !
Let them see , let them hear , they should also know what a song is , Tansen ` s prodigy .
If you get a break from chess then only household work will occur to you .
You didn ` t know today is Bindu ` s exam .
Why didn ` t you call the driver early ?
Bindu ` s mother , everything happens at its due time .
Your now and then has made my life difficult .
Only five minutes are remaining , check your papers .
Bindu ! how did the exam go ?
I feel like Bindu will fail this year as well .
Fine , at least you will think of her marriage under this pretext .
You will have to retaliate , your life is damned, till the time you do not slap Bindu even harder .
I and slap Bindu , no sir this is not not possible for me .
Think this that you are Arjun at this time and master Lord Krishna who is giving you initiation in work .
Bhole think , think appropriately that you have only two ways in front of you either you slap Bindu or our friendship is over .
But sir, what should I do , what should I do she is also dear to me and you are also dear to me .
Bhole we are four and she is one , will you leave all of us for onw , say Come on say Bhole .
Lady ! Nowadays your voice come from inside of my heart .
Come with me towards garden for a while .
Lady an astrologer met me .
He told me that my today will pass nicely .
But he told me , my day day will pass through badly .
You forgot he stays in the window in front of you window .
It is the same ruffian ,who is bothering me since so many days .
This is why you have been called here that you should take some decision .
What decision will I take ji , I am a dance master not any lawyer ji , nor any judge of court ji .
If I take government ` s law in my hand then government will put me behind bars for sx months .
Bindu the matter is like this , that I didn ` t come to slap you out of my own will .
My friends forced me .
Oh , so you had complained about me to your friends .
No Bindu I didn ` t complain .
I only related my heart ` s condition .
One has to relate his heart ` s condition to someone or the other .
As your name so are you .
Bindu ! you turned out to be very cunning , by keeping me busy in love chat you got me beaten up by ruffians .
I ` m saying the truth , I have no hand in this Bhola , Bhola .
Doctor is there any danger to his life ?
He is a young man , then what if a little blood has been shed .
It is possible he develops fever later on .
Sir tell me who attacked me .
I don ` t recognise him , I know nothing .
Moaning voices are coming from the neighbourhood .
I think he is completely alone .
Bindu ` s mother we will have to go and see .
You say it right neighbours should help in bad times! lets go fast .
Oh he has a very high fever , is there a thermometer in the house ?
Bindu child run and get a thermometer .
Get along an ice bag also .
Oh! why are you giving thermometer to me put it in the mouth .
Please open your mouth a little , have to put in themrometer .
Child ! it is morning now now go to your home and rest , you spent the entire night awake .
Tell me this that night who kept ice bag on my head , who massaged my soles with her palms , who opened my mouth and put thermometer .
I kept thinking that it ws my Aunt .
Oh my God , now that you know drink medicine .
Hail Radhe - Krishna hail Radhe - Krishna! Mister did you recognise me ?
From your clothes it seems you are a priest.
You are in need of a groom for your girl .
Thi is why I came to see you .
Bindu ! Bindu child ! I had to ask you something .
Have got you a photo , see to it what do you think ?
Oh , then why do you cry ?
I haven ` t approved yet , I came to know your will .
Then my will is something is else .
Bhole hey tell how are you ?
The thing is this sir , now Bindu has also begun to love me .
What! Am I that bad that she gives me love and i betray her .
What is your opinion sir ?
See Bhole I am of the opinion that till the time it works like this let it work , tell her everythign after wedding .
Hello happy anniversary to you .
Thankyou ! you had promised , that you will sing a song on my anniversary .
See , let us leave this song etc .
See the girls are dying out of excitement , I have promised all of them that you will sing song .
Today I am very happy , say what brought you here ?
Uncle you are elder , had to take an important consultation from you .
Son ! You did this right , that you opened our eyes , otherwise a huge sin would have been committed through us .
Master ! Right now I was thinking about you only .
Master you are very innocent .
When you are require dhere then you are thinking of going .
Mother , he is the one , that day whom I was talking about .
Daughter ! If this is your choice and this is your decision then in your happiness is our happiness .
Master , come upstairs with me , i will explain everything to you .
Whatever you have to talk about do it fast .
Now wherever we go will go together master .
Now you are not only my dance master , in fact you are about to become the owner of my destiny aslo .
NO , I am not owner , I am your servent .
Oh ! You didn ` t understand , day after tomorrow I am going to get married to you .
What is this Bindu , Since so many days I have been applying , you never gave a reply , today I didn ` t apply , you reply .
This is how it happens in matters of love .
Oh Bindu , say it slowly , if the enemy hears it then things will mess up .
Lord ! if we do not make the enemy listen then how are we going to make him jealous .
Have to make them jealous ! you tell me .
My marriage has been fixed with Bindu and you have been fixed in the house .
Bindu ! Is he saying the truth ?
Oh yes ! you should come for sure , bring your friends and relatives too , its a feast to everyone from my side .
Sir sir , do something , now even the procession has come .
Bhole Bhole ! now only one alternative is left .
Aunt ! Aunt ! terrible thing happened , Bhola committed suicide !
Bhola , Bhola what did you do ?
If I had known that you will take your life for my love then I wouldn ` t have done this ever .
So did he take his life because of you , God will never forgive you , never forgive you .
I was doing this marriage out of stubborness .
Child what did you do !
Sons of Thakur used to give their life in battle field for people , nation .
Son , sons of Rajput never give their life for the love of girls .
Hey Bindu , I have heard that your love can infuse life in a stone as well .
If you have even a little bit of love for Bhola in your heart then this is the time to confess it .
It is possible that because of your two love filled words , Bhola comes to life again, Bhola comes to life again .
Bhola I am your from the depth of my heart .
If you do not come back then I will also not be able to live without you .
Bhola you are alive , Bhola !
Be blessed be blessed ! Bindu you are Savitri ,you are Savitri ! Your love snatched Bhole ` s life from Yamraj .
Hindustan ! History is witness that dynasties thrive on this land through dose of blood only .
Since 1011 many have trampled it beneath their feet after robbing it from time to time .
In the year 1450 Mughals stepped in who made it their home , gave it love and decorated .
Mughal reign which began from emperor Babar reached Akbar via Humayun who acquired the highest standard in Mughal regime .
Jalalludin Muhammad Akbar, was alone such an emperor of Mughals whose took birth on Indian land, in Rajputana in the house of a Hindu Rajput house.
On the other hand was princess Jodha , who was also born in Rajputana , in Amer .
Her father was , King Bharmal and mother , Queen Padmavati .
He had fixed Jodha ` s marriage with the Ratansingh the prince of Ajabgadh during childhood itself .
Rajpoot , used to be prepared to fight since childhood itself so that they could safeguard their family , house and state .
Of them was a warrior prince Sujamal , Jodha ` s cousin .
Sujamal loved Jodha like his real sister and used to revert at Jodha ` s every request .
King Bhaarmal received the throne after the death of Sujamal ` s father because of which Sujamal was left alone .
Similarly Princess Jodha ` s story also seemed like that of outside of Rajpoot Rajwada ` s world.
Year 1555 , it was that year when Mughal regime was jolted due to sudden death of Emperor Humayun .
Taking advantage of this opportunity King Hemu captured the throne of Delhi and then Battle of Panipat ensued .
Hemu ` s army was made to lose in the Battle of Panipat and in thsi way Bairam Khan made Jalaluddin take over the throne of Delhi .
To acquire Hindustan completely Bairam Khan in the next six years sent proclamation in the name of Jalaludin Muhammad to neighbouring knigdoms and provinces .
You are warned on behalf of Mughal emperor Jalaluddin Muhammad that you should hand over your kingdom with army and treasure to Mughal empire in one month .
If you deny or if the the royal proclamation is not followed then it will be considered unpardonable offence and crime .
Sir Alampanah the last notice sent by us has also returned .
Hey azeemoshan Emperor , now behead this damned one .
No Khan Baba ! After the war whichever king is alive on our mercy , I can ` t take beheading him .
Pardon me Jahanpanah , but being a loyal servent I will exactly that which is in favour of the empire .
Jalal you have forgotten that
The strong citadel if Mughals we have created brick by brick , you are destroying it .
The passion for loyalty at times makes a human guilty , since last many wars we are seeing rebellion in your eyes .
Today for the first time we stopped your sword , you know why , because now I want to take my decisions on my own .
I want that from today onwards after winning any battle we should treat prisoners of war from every country mercifully.
Today I declare that prisoners of war will not be made slaves .
In this country we not only have to set standards of governance but also of honesty .
We misunderstood you .
If it is so then we will have no objection to run our kingdom under your patronage .
Now it is my desire that you should shed the weight of your responsibilities and go on pilgrimage .
One more kingdom has come under our wing Alampanah .
Kings of Rajputana have refused to listen to our proclamations .
Brother Sujamal ! Remember a moment ` s slip in a battle turns into a victory or loss .
So now my student will teach me a lesson in war policy .
Not teaching , just reminding you .
True and knowledgeable student is that one who after learning once saves it in the depth of its heart .
True! Agreed that I am a good student , but brother you are also an extremely learned teacher !
Now like a good student you will have to learn all royal ettiquetes from your m other , very soon you are going to get married .
YOu also listen to it brother ! till the time father does not decalre you prince , I will not marry .
Jodha , it is not right for girls to demand such things .
I have myself heard father praising you .
You posess valour , you have won many competitions , and now your war training has also ended .
On the auspicious occassion of Dusherra gentlemen ! , now is the time for some inportant declarations .
My first declaration is this that reins of Amer will be in hands of Bhagwan Das .
Second , Sujamal will work under Bhagwandas .
Now last decleration , for which all of you have been waiting .
This year on a fixed date princess Jodha and prince Ratan Singh will be engaged to each other by the grace of goddess Jambai .
Brother ! I am saddened to hear this .
It might be possible that father must have been helpless .
Do not give selfishness and greed the name of helplessness .
I am not greedy for royalty , have never eyed anything that is not mine .
I had no objection in sharing the reign with Bhagwandas and Mohansingh .
I want my honour , prestige if I do not get that then remember Jodha , even the setting sun has a lot of heat .
I will talk to emperor Aalamhuzoor on this issue at the right time .
Will also request that after talking ot King Bharmal you are crowned on the throne of Amer .
I will not be able to forget you favour , Sharifuddin Hussain !
You will have to help us attack Delhi after being crowned on the throne of Amer .
But you have been married to emperor ` s sister , right ?
Yes , I have been married to Jalalluddin ` s sister Bakshi Bano Begum .
After that only I have been made an officer of Ajmer , Nagaur and Mewat .
Do you know Sujamal ! the property of water and desires is same , to keep moving ahead , now I want entire Hindustan .
Allright , I will help you , but there should be no bloodshed in my coronation .
The very same thing happened which I had feared .
Sujamal has decided to snatch my throne with the help of Sharifuddin .
Because of war destruction will hover on our heads , thousands of women will be widowed and children orphaned .
How intelligent is it to throw innocents in the gulf of destruction ?
Chandrabhan ji ! wouldn ` t it be better to befriend Jalaluddin by entering into an alliance with Mughals .
If you do this then you will betray only , there can be no better example of treachery than this .
It is sad O King ! but I should tell you one thing , I honour Mughal treaty from the perspective of saving our people from defeat , death and destruction .
you are welcome here at Sanganer O king !
We informed dear king as soon as we received the message form Chandrabhan ji .
Jahanpanah! King Bharmal of Amer is waiting for sir ` s feet .
Greetings Shahanshah ! I bow to your valour .
We request you to come inside our pavilion .
Shahenshah I want to run the administration of Amer safely under your guidance .
I wish to talk to you one more subject .
You will have to hold my daughter princess Jodha ` s hand and Shehanshah this will mean Mughal relation being in an engagement with Amer .
I can understand that why you are silent , perhaps .
Not at all , to present the alliance in such a straightforward manner , I praise your clear-heartedness , and I am thankful to this upgrading of my honour.
I will be able to send you a reply only after visiting dargaah of Hazrat Khwaja Moinuddin Chishti .
Jalal! some altercations took place before us in the rajse of Ajmer.
Some Rajputs blocked the way of people visiting dargah , because of this tension spread .
Communal rivalry like these can anytime turn into some serious condition .
Is there a need for more security on the way to Ajmer ?
Khan Baba ! My message to King Bharmal fo Amer should be sent that I am ready to make his daughter my Shareek-e-Hayaat begum .
Especially say this as well that I accept this alliance with happiness for the sake of nation ` s sustenance and unity .
But Sir think about this that they are Rajput , hindu , how can this relation be possible ?
Sharifuddin ! I have taken this decision only after paying a lot of attention to it .
You know Khan Baba ! that for a very long time our elder patron Bairam Khan Baba managed the Mughal sultanate by using my name .
Every moment I kept thinking that why couldn ` t the previous emperors settle on the land of Hindustan .
Till now I was in this dilemma only that how should dreams be achieved .
Knew about the destination , didn ` t know about the path .
This invitation for Marriage , this talk of relationship is an indication of God ` s help .
Father I had nothing to say even then when i was engaged to Ratansingh , prince of Ajabgadh .
Controlled my heart , and made my mind for him .
But now I am being made to wear vermilion of such hands at whose place there is not even a word for vermilion .
Jodha ! Being your father I can read your mind , wherein prince Ratansingh resides , but they themselves called off this relationship .
I do not feel good while saying this but you will have to drink this poison not for your father but for your people , for the entire Dhundhar .
I have heard that invitation of brother ` s wedding has come from Agra .
Cannot understand how come everything happened so fast !
Ammi has gone on a tour of the estate , I should go soon , so many preparations are there .
Keep your emotions under control begum , do you even have an inclination with whom is this marriage going to take place ?
I have decided , before deciding on this marriage I want to meet the emperor first .
I don ` t know , pardon me he refused to even tell me .
How should I express my gratitude that you took the trouble to come here and listen to me .
I have two demands , on the acceptance of those only will I be able to marry you .
My first demand is that I will be given complete independence to maintain my religion , my belief and conduct .
Under no circumstances will I be forced to change my religion .
I will be allowed to take my Lord ` s idol along .
A temple will be established in my chamber for its consecration .
Beloved daughter of King Bharmal has posed two demands in front of me , on the approval of those will she say yes to get married to me .
For the first time today I received the complete feeling of Rajpoot elegance and honour .
I salute to the fearless passion and simplicity of the princess of Amer .
I should tell her this that even I am a native of this land , on which she took birth and even I hold that emotion .
My decision is that I agree to this alliance with Princess Jodha of Amer and her demands will be met word by word .
This wedding of yours has brought a new gift for the pilgrims visiting Ajmer .
अगर हमारा करीब होना आपको गंवारा नहीं तो खुले के लिए रास्ता खुला है, ये आपका हक़ है।
You can free yourself by breaking off this knot of relation .
Divorce is at your place , at our place it is a relationship of seven births .
I am grateful to you that you honoured my demands , but don ` t know why doubts arise in my mind .
I could not associate my mind with this wedding , because of this reason also that our religion , our culture is different .
I have undoubtedly said yes but till now my mind has not permitted me to be one .
I respect you , give regard to your feelings .
Now I will be near to you only when your heart vouches for it .
You are mother of Shahanshah-e-Hind , empress Bano Mohtarma .
God may save you from evil eye , keeps you prosperous and happy forever , Amen !
Meet her she is Mahamanga , Jalal ` s dai ma , to say Jalal ` s foster mother would be more appropriate .
Be careful daughter , Mahamanga has a seperate status , Jalal considers her above everyone else , even me .
For fifteen years in my absence she only brought up Jalal by holding him close to her heart .
Do not keep any doubt in your heart , this is your house only .
This person seeks pardon for impudence and wants to say that sir ` s heart is dominating his brain .
What was the obligation of tying a Hindu princess to the hem ?
That was the decision of a government Maulana ! which will be in favour of everyone and in which there is goodness of our people , that should not be weighed on the scale of religion .
My concern is why was a temple constructed in the castle , this is an injury on our hearts .
Whatever I did was subject to time and situation .
The thought of empire ` s progress is more in my heart than you .
Who is this talking to Shehenshah ji in such a loud voice ?
This is not the reason , I have complete faith in his administrative ability .
After all Adam Khan is like his elder brother .
What I want to know is , what do you know about politics and administration ?
You were nothing , but a puppet dancing on Bairam Khan ` s dictats .
Don ` t forget that my mother has been advising you from time to time .
Is marrying an unholy Hindu girl pride of Mughal empire ?
Sujamal wandered here and there with appeal for his rights after not receiving support from Sharifuddin .
He received support , first of Prince Ratansingh of Ajabgadh and then of Rana Udaysingh .
I will erase even the name of Jodha and Jalauddin from the memories of entire Rajputana .
I am myself worried that what must Jodha be going through because of marriage .
Her Majesty ! Jahanpanah has hosted a feast in your honour on the day of the peer , and has sent this advance gift as well .
This means only one thing he is trying to woo you .
As per your order all the utensils have been cleaned .
She will get Rajputi food made herself without chicken - mutton .
Due to this unwanted nuptial knot do not assume that a princess has become an empress .
Temple in Agra fort, taking over royal kitchen , I am understanding everything .
Taking over kitchen ! this is every married woman ` s right .
Do not forget this , you have been traded with Jalal .
This must be trading for you , for me this nuptial knot is as holy as a prayer rosary .
This is why princess Jodha ! Keep enjoying Mughal empire but do not even try to become a part of it .
With what authority do you command your right of being Shehanshah ji ` s mother ?
Yes I am his mother , I have made him drink my milk , have nurtured him by sacrificing sleep and peace .
For a very long time I have only saved Shahenshah from all troubles .
Any external power could not harm him .
During childhood he was attacked with arrows , I saved him by taking that arrow on my chest .
Anybody tries to come between me and Jalal then I will destroy him .
Jahanpanah ! today I have made Daal-Baati choorma , Ker Saangri , Pakaude , Gatte , Til Papdi and Panchmel Sabzi .
Jahanpanah ! Ghevar and Sohan Halwa is present before you to taste sweets .
Food is extremely tasty , feel like saying subhan allah at every bite .
Jodha ! I do not feel like going but what to do this tour of kingdom is very important .
Go , and then life long bang your head against rock walls in captivity .
Shamsuddin Alga Khan has got an inclination about the manipulation that I have done in the amount of rent and tax .
Before Shamsuddin reveals everything in front of Todharmal , Shamsuddin has to be stopped.
Due to that serious crime I had to take his life , this was the demand of justice badi ammi .
I believe that Adam dared a wrong act and served its punishment .
This is why I am pardoning you Jalal .
I have knowledge that no one can come between you and the royal seat, and according to me even Jodha shouldn ` t dare any such act .
Enquire to who else does she write letters apart from her mother ` s house .
Many a times even I see her in my dreams , fearless , moving her last steps .
Her steps had never learnt to wobble .
But the most I remember are , those eyes , fearless , clear , stable , piercing deep inside .
Hey Su ! there is no need to be perturbed , all preparations have been done .
Posters have been made to put at various places , it has been announced on radio as well .
Now see how many people come at auditions .
What happened ?
I didn ` t tell you , but the truth is this that now only I am there .
We can use one or two for unimportant roles , but Azad , Bhagat Singh can ` t be found till far .
Yes true , everything is my fault .
No Sonia ! Its just you who is with me , its my fault .
Where did you get lost ?
Will you guys act in my film ?
Why are you people laughing ? I am the hero of her film .
Oh friends ! Leave these talks of patriotism , find them very boring .
Boring , these people laid their lives for freedom , for your country .
What freedom Su , have you seen the condition of this country , nobody believes.
One minute Karan , I believe , I have faith , on this country , on patriotism , otherwise why would I fight for my country ?
I am ready to lay my life for this county , I am proud of this country .
You are proud ! on what on the population of the country , on corruption , on what thing are proud most ?
No country is perfect , one has to make it better .
Good morning Karan ! Are you coming or are you going ?
I didn ` t know that you are in the city ?
I reached just an hour before .
Was a very long flight .
How is your college going on ?
Excellent Dad !
Thought something ? Next year which American university will you go to ?
What are you doing Lakshman ! Party high command is very happy with your work .
This demonstration that you have initiated against western civilisation , because of that the luster of rest of the youth parties has faded .
Take this , for you and for your boys .
No Mishra ji ! This is not needed . I am not working for parties for money .
I sincerely believe , in my party ` s principles .
Bhagat Singh used to think , that too at the age of 23 years and in this young age he ascended at scaffold for his country .
Yes , the time was different then Su !
Today if you say to someone that I can lay my life for my country , you know what will people say , is you brain at its right place !
I cant understand even now Su .
I have named my life to the freedom of my nation , things like luxurious comforts , job , house do not hold any value for me .
I know , you want that my wedding should take place , I should settle down , like parents of every kid wants , but freedom is my bride .
Where can such friends be found ?
One day nothing like this will remain , everybody will take their own road .
Even then we can meet sometimes .
Doesn ` t happen ji , world ` s hassles , hunt a job , earn money , start a family , and keep dancing on the prompts of life .
On this side of the gate we control life , then on the other side life controls us .
U know Gulabo ! It has been five years since I have passed out of the university , even them I am here only .
I didn ` t get you .
I want to stay in the university only .
इधर कैम्पस में लोग जानते हैं मेरे लिए, डीजे दी इथे कोई औकात है।
People say , there is something in DJ , DJ will do something , but in the world outside best of DJ broke down .
Gulabo ! there is one more thing I am scared of , that is , acting in a film .
Do not be perturbed , I am with you .
Don ` t you find friends in your own religion ?
In this where did religion community came from ?
This country , never considered muslims its part , nor will it ever consider .
Doesn ` t your blood boil , have you ever seen me , befriend any Hindu ?
I cannot think like you brother ! and don ` t even want to think .
I feel stifled in this house , day in day out just that one thing .
Lucknow bound train , in which foreigners ` money travels , we will rob it exactly eight days later , and with that money we will buy ammunition .
Bismil sir is going to explain the entire plan after he come here.
You will not find true Ramprasad Bismil here , you need true Indian .
You are looking for true Indian , revolutionaries in people who themselves want to become foreigners .
Do not entertain him . Come on lets go .
Ramprasad Bismil wanted to take birth a hundred times only because , he could lay his life for his motherland a hundred times .
So you tell me , where will I find my Bismil !
Look Su ! This is not London , you do not know sordid people like Lakshman pandey .
Look Su ! If you want to take him , then I am not working in this film .
If you have an issue with me then say it on my face , why are you backbiting , like girls .
Pandey ! you better go from here , we do not want any scuffle , do you understand !
Su , I am sorry friend , you know that our tension has always has always been there with Lakshman Pandey .
And if I stay here then this will happen again .
No , won ` t happen . I am saying this , we have discussed it . Now you will not face any problem ,
Su ! everybody knows that how important this film is for you .
Everyone wants that whatever work you came to complete , you should complete that .
Everybody wants that you should stay .
I want that you should stay .
Coming four weeks were the most difficult days of my life and most memorable as well .
Kakori robbery of 1925 , everything began from there .
After that nothing stayed like before .
Kakori robbery was a tight slap on the face of the British government .
But its accused were us only .
Now what was being heard , was resonance of our own guns.
The revolution of Jallianwala Bag imbued anger into peace loving Indians .
This was the time when Bhagat Singh left his pen and wrote his destiny after picking up arms .
General Dyer , how can any person even think of doing something like that .
I didn ` t know that he killed around four hundred people in Jalianwala Bag .
It was the official figure , 389 , actually more than 1000 people had died .
We were also champions in tolerating , suppress us as much as possible .
If you press an ant then it bites , we didn ` t know how to answer .
We knew it son ! today ` s generation doesn ` t know how to .
It is such a weird thing , the country is ours , the land is ours , and the foreigners are driving us out .
Ashfaq ! come to Afghanistan , there are many of our muslim friends , you will stay safe with them , after all you are their own .
Their , am I not your own ?
This was not what I meant Ashfaq .
As much as this country is mine , is yours as well .
You also have complete right to fight for it , to die for it .
Why do you talk of dying ?
God willing , we can see our forthcoming generation breathing in a liberated Hindostan .
Where is Azad ?
Azad was not someone to come in hands easily .
Expert in changing guise , he would be missing in a moment .
After efforts of several months British government found a chance .
Banwarilal , who was the weakest among captured revolutionaries , and the one who gave us information of whereabouts of Bismil and Ashfaq , he became for us the path to reach Azad .
First of all I heard his voice , a voice in which there was resonance of truth , that very moment I realised my work is not going to be easy .
My prayers will continue till the time my country does not receive freedom .
I don ` t think you will be able to wait till then .
I am James Mc Caini , I have come here to know from you that where are Azad and his other rowdy mates .
There are not rowdy , they are revolutionaries , call them revolutionaries .
I was told that with time this work will be easy , but with me that didn ` t happen .
We kept totrturing , but neither did Bismil break nor Ashfaq , both of them befriended pain .
In fact they did something I had never seen before .
When we were breaking their bodies , then may be it was their poetry only , which maintained their soul .
Su! I have never seen these people serious ever .
What are you doing with my friends .
Nothing , whatever it is , they are doing themselves .
There are some things , worth giving life for .
Leave it friend ! Bhagat Singh , Bismil , Ashfaq , they gave life for their country didn ` t they , anything happened ?
Have you seen the condition of this country today and is anyone bothered about this country ?
I am bothered , people like Ajay are bothered , who firght for this country Karan , so that people like you can sleep in peace .
Karan ! It is very easy to give commentary from afar , abusing someone is even easier , if you have a problem then you change this country .
This is your country as well , join politics , join police or I.A.S. , change things , but you wouldn ` t do .
Because who wants to blacken his hands in the cleansing of the house .
If you have this much strength then move ahead , change this country ` s future .
Nothing will change my friend ! This is the way things happen , and will keep happening . Here you initiate , and there you will be put to an end .
Aunty ji ! You have got a very good daughter-in-law , will now touch Ajay ` s feet as well .
See , what is the condition of the nation ` s woman , what all she has to do .
Their childhood has not gone past , half the time they keep fighting , the rest of the time keep on persuading each other .
I can understand , how must Sonia must be feeling .
Initially even I used to feel like that , when I got married to Commander Rathore .
Then gradually it began to be realised that he is of the nation first , then mine .
You want or you don ` t want , this truth you have to accept .
You go from here , we do not want to kill any Indian .
After that Azad , Bhagat Singh , Rajguru and their mates , all disappeared .
This was the time when they composed this slogan - Inquilab Zindabad .
Wow ! what a plan , but Bhagat it is impossible to escape from there .
Who wants to escape Panditji , our real motive is to surrender ourselves to the British .
If we get caught then a trial will take place and through this trial we will make our voice reach people , will wake them up .
But the one who gets caught , he can be hanged as well .
I know , but those who are hard of listening they require a blast .
They were only smoke bombs , whose motive was to raise Indians from their sleep , Bhagat Sing ` s plan was successful .
We are political prisoners , we should get books , pen , paper to write and minimum a newspaper daily .
And till that time we will not eat anything , hunger strike will continue .
Their hunger strike continued till 114 days .
In the history of the world no revolutionary could not tolerate such torture for so many days under such inhuman conditions .
This investigation of Mig airplanes may not drown us .
Won ` t happen Shastri ji ! public ` s memory is very weak , rest we will take care of .
News of a dead soldier remains alive in media for a long time .
Shastri Ji ! one enlists in army to lay his/her life for the country .
Here eyes are damp for Ajay Rathore and anger is visible in all of these , towards the government , especially towards defence minister .
Government cannot turn its face like these , they have to clearly tell the public that why cheap , bad quality spare parts of Mig plane are bought .
MIG can be made again , our kids cannot come back .
See , it is very clear , defense minister is responsible for it .
He will have to resign .
It seems people will expose defence scam , but how successful will they be in this , only time will tell .
Our defense minster says that Lieutenant Ajay Rathore was a novice .
Today how many sons of how many ministers of our country are in the army , today I want to ask this question .
Take her to emergency fast .
You please stop here .
You took out a front against your own government , this cannot happen .
The front was not against the government , it was on the side of truth .
Our youth enlists in army , even lay down their lives for the country and these corrupt ministers fill their safe at the cost of their lives .
What can we even do , country ` s law is in its pocket .
We will have to do something that can shake them from their roots .
What is the meaning , what do you want to do ?
Kill him .
What ? Kill the defense minister , have you gone crazy !
We people are not killers Sonia !
We are not thirsty for someone ` s blood .
I will arrange for the gun .
Goes out for a walk at eight ` o clock everyday , will finish there itself .
The truth should reach people .
You have thought about it properly haven ` t you ?
Your father ` s life long hard work , name , fame everything will drown .
Say why did you do all of this , why did you do ?
Why did you do ?
What did I do ?
But whatever happened has happened , now I will take care of everything .
Mother , you Ajay went away , his life won ` t go waste .
After all what is in these guys , that they are not scared .
You go on the mike , I will manage outside .
Hey ! you keep the show on else i ` ll switch you off .
Come on come out , don ` t worry , nothing will happen to you .
Come on get out of here .
You do not need to worry , we will not say anything to anyone .
My name is Rahul and the show ` s name is ` Raat baaki baat baaki ` .
Today a surprise guest has come in the studio with us , who is also a very old friend of mine , whose name is Karan Singhania !
My name is Karan Singhania , my friends and I killed defense minister Shastri .
We are no terrorists , there is no foreign hand behind us , not from any political group , we five are students of Delhi University .
We killed defense minister , because he took our friend Flight Lieutenant Ajay Rathore ` s life .
He was also responsible for many brave pilots like Ajay Rathore .
We killed him because after taking Ajay ` s life he abused his name as well .
Ajay ` s mother , who not only sacrificed her son for the nation but her husband also ,is battling for life in coma in hospital today .
Defense minister is for the protection of the country , he sold the country .
We killed him because even after committing such a big crime he was escaping out clearly from right under our nose .
Today we have come over here to confess our crime .
Just now a news has been received , attackers of defense minister are hiding in All India Radio .
Delhi police ` s team has reached the spot , trapped people there are being evicted out .
You go on the mike , we don ` t have much time , will catch us by entering in 15-20 minutes , whatever you have to say go say .
We have even heard that Rajnath Singhania ` s name is also included in the brokerage of planes .
My name is Daljeet Singh , there are only two ways to live life .
One to let happen whatever is happening , keep tolerating or to take up responsibility to change it .
Before coming here Karan Singhania killed his father Rajnath Singhania as well .
This is a lot of blood flowing friend !
Let it be friend ! Actually I got tired running .
I always thought that there are two kind of people in the world .
One who silently hold death ` s hem and second those who move towards death baling and wailing .
I met humans of the third kind .
The bus is halted for you since ten minutes .
Are you unable to listen , everyday it gets late because of you .
First wash your hands and come .
What , what do you do in school ? See hands ! See face !
Ishan keep that , hey at least turn off the tap properly .
Inu ! today exam papers were supposed to be received , did the teacher give ?
Inu ! what am I asking ?
Mother ! Practical cancel , Hindi teacher caught viral .
First in all subjects mom .
Inu ! How did yours go ?
He is being Wow !
Ishan , first finish your homework , no Ishan.
Hey didn ` t I tell you get the ball , don ` t you understand .
Your child destroyed all my plants .
You have not taught anything to your kids .
Uncle he tore even my shirt .
Ishan this is the limit everyday your complaint ! complaint from school , complaint from building , if I step outside the house then complaint .
How many times I have told you Inu ! Do not play with Ranjit .
Go take a bath , then I will apply Dettol .
Papa where are you going Papa ?
Leaving home , won ` t come back .
Why are you scaring the kid , Inu Papa is going for office work not because of you , will be back by Sunday .
What a handwriting ! What is this Ishan all your spellings are wrong ?
Enough of merrymaking , you will have to stay back in that class again .
All your friends will go to the next standard , will you feel good ?
Go to sleep Inu , no story today , I am very tired .
Dada I ran from school today , I crossed the wall and escaped .
After first period , had not done maths homework , and had not got even unit test paper signed .
Dada please write absent note .
No no , I am not going to write any fake absent note , come on sleep now will tel mom everything tomorrow .
Inu papa has come .
When did papa come ?
Last night , you were sleeping .
Maya ! Ishan had fever on thursday ? what is this absent note !
I did not write this note .
Ishan what is this ? What is the meaning of this note ?
Bunked school Ishan , where did you go ?
Who wrote this absent note ? You cannot write properly .
No improvement in classwork and homework , exactly like last year .
You must have seen exam papers , have boiled eggs in every subject .
Had you sent his exam papers ?
Last Wednesday for parents signature , have not returned till date .
Mister Awasthi ! Otherwise also it is your son ` s second year in third standard .
If it continues like this then I will not be able to help you in anyway .
perhaps he has some problem , there are special schools for such children .
Let him complete this year , he hasn ` t stayed without me till date.
See how he is staring , will straighten him there at boarding school through beating .
Believe me Maya , I am his father , fees is out of budget but will adjust somehow .
Papa please do not send me papa .
Papa I will not go to boarding school , mom you say please I do not want to go .
You father tells us that you are every stubborn , listen to one thing clearly , only one rule is followed in this school discipline .
You do not be perturbed Mr. Awasthi we have tamed the wildest horses here .
Hey you are not ready till now and how have you worn this tie , mummy has taught you nothing .
Children he is Ishan Nand Kishore Awasthi .
Here come in front , pick your bag .
Today onwards your place is here , right in front of my eyes .
Besides Rajan Damodran , Rajan Damodran comes first in class .
Rajan Damodran ` s company has a positive result on you , I expect this .
How come you came in the middle of a session ?
Come on it ` s art class .
You always come first in class, then why did you parents sent you here ?
I mean in boarding , to punish ?
I do not stay in boarding , my father is estate manager of school .
I stay in staff quarters with my mother , father .
Who told you here all children come for punishment ?
Where did you go ? Your mother ` s phone had come .
Go keep standing near the phone she is going to call again .
Have heard that you were singing in the class and were playing flute as well .
Yes ! was singing and was playing flute as well , children happy , I am happy .
Listen , where is your friend ?
Don ` t know sir was here right now suddenly ran away .
Must have had seen his new boring art teacher .
NO , no sir must have gone to dining hall for lunch .
What is this matter of Ishan , what problem does he has ? Always stays scared .
He has a problem , however much you try cannot study , cannot write , is punished all the time .
Ishan paints ?
Yes , he has an inclination for painting .
Why did you send him ?
There was no way , last year he failed in third standard , would you believe ?
There are no chances of his improvement this my elder son comes first in every class every subject and that second .
This trouble of reading - writing is called Dyslexia .
At times a child has many more problems along with dyslexia .
Did Ishan face problems with tying shirt buttons or shoe laces ?
Rohan when you throw ball towards him then can he catch the ball ?
He cannot judge the ball .
Because he cannot understand size , speed , distance all three together .
Just think , a child of only eight years cannot study , cannot write .
Cannot do daily ordinary tasks , can ` t do all those things which children of his age do so easily .
What must be passing through him , his self confidence must have been shattered .
I am sorry that he has stopped painting , a very sad thing indeed .
You are saying that my son is not normal , is mentally retarded .
Weird man you are , look at this Mister Awasthi , this sharp mind is weaving thousand dreams in colours .
Way beyond your and my competence .
I know , outside there thrives a merciless competent world .
In this world everybody want to grow toppers and rankers in their own houses .
Everybody wants top marks , less than doctor , engineer , management is not even tolerable .
Hey think for a while , every child has its own quality , own talent , own desire .
But everybody is busy lengthening every finger by stretching it .
Continue , even if the finger breaks .
Hey there is no way , if there is so inclination to run horses then why do you give birth to kids .
When will they understand that every kid picks up weight according to his capacity .
If not today then would have learnt yesterday , everyone has its own pace .
It is with five fingers that a hand is made up of .
Friends today I will tell you people a story , story of a boy .
Ishan please switch on the light .
किस महान हस्ती ने दुनिया को इलैक्ट्रिसिटी से रोशन किया?
आओ बैठो ईशान, नहीं लाईट रहने दो एडिसन भाई की रोशनी हमारे पर पड़ती रहे।
जानते हो उन सारे लोगों का एक और नाम था जो मैंने नहीं लिया।
शायद इसलिए कि वो नाम इतना महान नहीं, लेकिन तकलीफ उसे भी वही है।
मुझे भी बचपन में पढ़ने-लिखने की तकलीफ थी।
मेरे पिताजी मुझे समझ ही नहीं पाए।
उनको लगता था कि मैं शैतानी कर रहा हूँ, जानबूझ के नहीं पढ़ रहा हूँ।
उनको लगा आगे चलकर मेरा कुछ नहीं होगा।
आज जो हूँ तुम्हारे सामने हूँ ईशान।
सर मुझे एक स्टूडेंट के बारे में बात करनी थी।
Ishan Awasthi , third D , is a new student .
We don;t think he will be able to manage year long .
No sir , he is a very intelligent child he has a little problem with reading and writing .
You must be knowing about dyslexia .
You have made our task easier Nikumb , was wondering what will we tell his father .
Then special school is the only best place for him , right ?
No sir , he has complete right to stay in a normal school he just needs a little help from us .
Otherwise also worldwide all kinds of children whatever their problem is , study together in normal school .
Pardon me sir , I am not saying this , this is being said by the law of country India .
Under education to all every child gets this right .
See you tell me one thing , how will this child be able to manage here ?
Will do it sir if teachers help a bit .
To pay attention to one child among forty kids !
Sir it won ` t take as much time as you are thinking , only two-three hours in a week .
I can do and show it sir and otherwise also he just has to pass in all these subjects , his real destination is somewhere else sir .
Every child has his own talent .
Sir just have a look at the child ` s painting .
What a thought sir , made by only eight year old kid !
Sir very people are able to think out of the box .
He just needs one chance otherwise his hopes will dash .
What do you want from me ?
Sir till some time his spellings , his handwriting should be ignored .
His test should be taken verbally , knowledge is knowledge sir whether oral or written .
I am working on his reading , writing gradually that will also improve .
Painting competition ! for teachers students every one !
What is the aim of colours ? to give release to emotions hidden inside .
Mister Awasthi come . How come here ? Did you meet Ishan ?
No I won ` t meet him now , Had to talk about something to you first .
My wife is surfing internet since many days .
She has read all the information published on dyslexia .
Had to tell you , if you were thinking that we are among those people who do not take care of their kids .
To care is very important Mister Awasthi , there is power of cure in it , an ointment with which pain is relieved .
The child is reassured that somebody takes care of him .
Child ! I love you , if there is any worry then come to me .
This is what is called as to care, isn ` t it Mister Awasthi !
I brought me happiness to hear that you feel that you care .
Rajan ! where is Ishan ?
Don ` t know sir , he left hostel even before everyone else woke up .
Where were you ? come sit , do you have colours ?
There is a good news now we there would be no need to look for a new art teacher .
Along with Tulip school Nikumb sir will teach in our school as well .
Now we are going to announce that which is the most awaited .
The painting which will be chosen , we thought it should become front cover of year book of school .
Yes kids , this Nikumb sir of yours , have lost .
The child to make him lose is the young nine year old Nand Kishore Awasthi .
Ishan where are you ?
This is your Ishan and this is his painting .
Initially it was felt that there is a lot of mess he will not be able to stay here for long .
Then what improvement he showed , wow what a perspective of the child , very good .
Take this progress report of the kid , your child is very talented .
I can ` t come to believe .
I can ` t understand how should I say thank you to you!
