The importance of agriculture in the socio-economic framework of India can be felt by the fact that the livelihood of most of the country ` s population is dependent on agriculture .
The contribution of the agricultural sector to the Gross Domestic Product (G D P) is only 18 percent while as more than 60 percent population is dependent on it, result of which the per capita income in less .
It is also understood from this that there is a lot of disparity between the per capita income in agricultural sector and non-agricultural sector .
So it is necessary to resolve those issues which have effect on the income levels of the farmers .
The level of income is decided by total production and proper productivity level and the price obtained by the farmers .
Obstacles like abundance of small and tertiary cultivation which is about 80 percent of the total cultivation, incomplete market conditions and shortage of post and pre-communication also adversely affect the income levels of the farmers .
Accordingly, it is necessary to frame a useful strategy for making the agricultural activity more workable and permanent improvement in economic condition of the farmers is assured .
Other than this, many big and small irrigation projects were also undertaken .
In the beginning of the decade of 1960 a unified program was started for increasing productivity and benefiting the farmers and for agricultural development .
Our scientists contributed in developing hybrid varieties of high yielding types/crops .
Farmers were acquainted with it and they too adopted the new seeds and technologies .
As a result, in the late sixties there was a lot of progress in the productivity and production of wheat .
Other than this, the new strategy emphasized on the denseness of the crop .
From then, the rate of increase in the agricultural yield remained above the rate of increase in the population .
As a result, a state of self sufficiency remained in foodgrains and this was known in the form of ` Green Revolution Age ` .
Technology services, co-ordination in the government policy and industriousness of the farmers were the highlights of this age .
Even then, during the last decade production and productivity remained constant and the rate of development slowed .
To stop this decline and to move the agricultural sector ahead again, it is necessary to do more efforts .
During the year 2000 the national agricultural policy was approved by the Indian government whose goal was to achieve 4 percent more annual increase in agriculture on a long term basis through the medium of effective use of natural resources and other means .
On the other side non-agricultural sector grew more fast as expected .
The fall in the progress of the agricultural sector and the decreasing profitability in agriculture in front of the fast growth of the non-agricultural sector is the main thing of worry .
This lull was connected to the decreasing productivity of the crops, as a result the level of income of the farmers remained less .
Normally in the rural areas and specially in farmer families, shortage of employment opportunities is also another main problem .
Under the hindu ancestral rights (revised) act (2005) after giving land rights to the women, it became a necessary task to provide useful assisting services to the women farmers .
Joint land-tenure should be compulsory relating to both the house and farming land by which women can become eligible for availing loan and other services .
The regulation for land acquirement, specifically for counting damages, will be scrutinized .
For non-agricultural projects, as feasible, land with less fertility for agriculture will be allotted .
For irrigation, non-availability of enough water and at the right time is becoming a serious problem currently in many parts of the country in achieving both high productivity and stability in farming .
So assured irrigation is the need of the time .
In our country, although it rains satisfactorily but its division is very uneven .
So rain water storage and skillful use of water is important .
Efficiency in use of water can also be increased by co-ordination among seeds, variety, nutrients (macro and micro) and equipment of farming .
The thought process of increasing maximally the productivity and income of per unit of water should also be included in all crop production programs .
Water using organizations will be encouraged to achieve mastery in getting maximum advantage of available water .
It is also important to keep in mind that most farmers are dependent on land water for irrigation of their crops .
This resource, in which the farmers have invested their savings earned from efforts, is today decreasing day by day .
So, to ensure stability and longevity of water supply, rain water storage and restoring of water bodies will be given importance .
Other than resolving the problems of adequacy and quality, evenness in water distribution will be assured .
Water is a public resource and not private .
So developing a fair and equal system for accessing water and involving local people in the management of water resources will have to be given importance .
Women, in the form of water user, will have to play a role in both access and management .
For increase in availability water and doing it ` s correct usage the following remedies will be done .
For assuring the stability of supply, rain water storage and restoring water bodies will be given importance .
To regulate and control land water development and management, necessary united legislative remedies will be done .
All existing wells and ponds will be restored .
A water literacy campaign will be started and necessary rules will be made for constant use of land water .
In water scarce areas, emphasis will be given on useful way of farming high priced and less water demanding crops like pulses and oilseeds .
In certified famine prone areas a famine code will be applied in which the measures adopted to reduce the effect of unfavorable monsoon and to take maximum advantage of good weather will be mentioned .
In the same way in areas of excessive heavy rainfall a flood code will be applied by which immediately after the floods, keeping in mind the requirements of the farmers, help will be obtained for changing the flood free weather into a main farm production period .
National Rainforest Area Authority will give the technical and other support in this regard .
Livestock which includes poultry is an important means of livelihood .
This farming contributes to about one fourth of the gross domestic product .
Women are involved in large numbers in this activity .
Ownership of livestock is much more balanced because the families of poor farmers mostly have cattle , buffalo , sheep and goats .
The big hurdles faced by the farmer families are reproduction, fodder, health maintenance, and prices for their produce .
It is necessary to resolve these issues with the help of useful strategy .
Farmer clinics run by the animal doctors and agricultural science graduates will be encouraged in increasing the income of the owners of the animals through high productivity of the livestock and overall workmanship .
Along with this, crop-livestock unified farming techniques and organic farming and production of bio-fertilizers will be encouraged .
There is also a necessity to restructure the insurance of animals and this will be made easy for all the animals owners .
In regard to poultry it is necessary to take the following measures .
On all ports of entry, for imported birds quarantine (quarantine) and checkup and vaccination facilities will established and strengthened because such safety measures are very essential for keeping the poultry industry in a good state and for protection of life and livelihood .
Before giving permission to sell in the market, safety of imported poultry vaccines and checkup of efficacy will be made mandatory .
Poultry will be recognized in the form of a agricultural activity .
To encourage collective or small poultry asset holders adequate help will be made available for backyard poultry farmers .
Lakhs of families get income and livelihood from both coastal and inland fishing .
Encouraging fishery in the scientific form, clustering and processing, there are enough opportunities to improve the income of the fisherman families on a consistent basis in eco-friendly form .
National Fishery Development Board (NFDC) has been established by the Indian government by which full attention can be given on fishing and main activities related to water-agriculture and professional management can be done .
The following steps will be taken for encouraging modern water-agriculture procedures and price enhancing .
Coastal communities should be made capable for creating biocover like mangroves, kejurina, Elecornia Atriplex and other holophytic plants .
By this help will be available in keeping safe the life and livelihoods of the coastal fishermen and farm families in the situations of sea water flooding like cyclones, tsunami .
Bio resources are related to the ample reserve of flora and fauna in which are included soil, small plants and small creatures which is the third most important available natural resource after land and water .
For attaining some of the above said goals there are two enactments present - Plant variety protection and Farmer Rights Act (PPVFR), 2001 and Bio Diversity Act 2002 .
The implementation of these acts will be made stronger and broad directives will be developed in such a way that the rights of the farmers and farmer community can be recognized .
For protection and development of bio-resources the following will be encouraged .
Through the bio-diversity registers traditional information (traditional knowledge) will be documented in which involvement of women will be done who have a lot of this knowledge .
By genetic homogeneity there will be increase in the genetic vulnerability towards pests and diseases .
So unification of pre reproduction and collective reproduction will be done so that small farmers will get help in protecting from pest and disease epidemic .
To understand the importance of protection of genetic resources encouragement will be given to establish genome clubs in the rural schools and colleges .
In such bio-valleys farmers will be helped through venture capital and other assistance so that they are able to protect, choose and factorize valuable medicinal plants for the protection of health .
A process of awards and rewards will be developed so that people can be made able and encouraged to keep their genus safe under the bio-diversity act .
For these purposes use of bio-diversity process will be done .
Livestock owners will be encouraged to accept their right to continue the use and development of their reproduction fund and reproduction traditions .
Accepting the important role of protection of genetic diversity and livestock owners, it is necessary to document the indigenous knowledge about animal protection and reproduction of the shepherd community .
For encouraging on spot safety with regard to animal species state farms can be used .
For giving protection to animal genetic resources pastures will be designated .
Documentation of special bio and financial specialties will be done with reference to new life sciences and new nutrient requirements or other economic varieties like quality of skin/leather .
For testing germ plasma, facilities related to protection from disease will be provided and choosing of disease tolerant varieties will be given preference .
Indian varieties of cow-buffaloes are in demand in other countries .
So Zoology graduates, self-help groups (SHG) and progressive animal farmers will be encouraged to keep such breed of animals and given assistance so that maximum benefit can be taken of the opportunities of export.
But export of all bio material, in which animals are also included will be done according to the postulates of bio-diversity act .
The role of science and technology is important in the change happened in farm management and yield .
To gain control on the lull in the technology used in the present , new technology , which can be useful to increase the per unit of production of land and water is necessary .
Non-governmental organisations (NGOs) and private sector research and development organisations will also be included in NARS .
NARS will be restructured so that problems of small and tertiary farmers can be solved in an effective way .
Research strategy should be favorable to the nature, should be in the interest of small farmers and women .
To assure the safe and responsible use of re-compounded DNA technology or genetic engineering, a national bio technology regulation authority will be established .
Increase will be done in yield of various types of crops according to requirement, like from the viewpoint of being researched, good quality fruits and vegetables .
To fulfill the requirements of the farmers and to increase the scientific yield in organic farming high level multi-disciplinary effort will be done .
There is a chance to adopt principles and ways of organic farming under crop-livestock-fishing unified production processes .
In agricultural areas with dense unitary crop, from the viewpoint of ecology, economics and income generation, crop diversification can be beneficial .
Even then, along with any advice given with regard to crop diversification, such measures should also be definitely told by which effective market assistance can be assured for optional crops .
At the time of making ready the plan for crop diversification, specially from food crops to non-food crops like in relation to production of bio-fuel, national food safety will be kept in mind .
In Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) rules, researched products and with regard to process of pricing for farmers, provision for compulsory licensing of rights will be made .
In all matters of health and food safety social inclusion will be guiding .
Through proper integration of technology services and public policy, priority will be given to changing the Sindhu-Ganga plains into a main foodgrain producing area and protection farming in the original area of green revolution .
Farming bio-safety of crops, trees and farm and water creatures is very important because this is related to the work and income safety of most of the population and safety of food and trade of the nation .
Including crops, animal husbandry, fishery, forestry and farming-friendly micro organisms, an integrated national agriculture bio-safety system (NABS) will be established with the following goals .
In short, medium and long term weather forecast the national capacity is much more .
To give suggestions to farmers about proper land use in minimum time, agriculture-climate scientific advice issued from time to time by the trained workers at the village council level will be used .
In matters of sea fishing, with respect to height of the waves and the place of obtaining of schools of fish, available numbers will be conveyed to the fishermen .
In this matter newest technologies like internet FM/HAM radio/cellphone like services will be very helpful for the fishermen .
Changes happening in the climate due to temperature, rain and adverse changes in sea levels is an upcoming topic .
Most experts agree to this that effect of global temperatures is worrisome which is clear from the melting of the glaciers and peaks of Antarctica and the Arctic .
Also there is being an increase in the frequency and intensity of coastal storms and cyclones .
As a result of these changes probably there is more possibility of famine and flood .
To reduce the vulnerability towards climatic changes, active measures will be taken .
Based on exemplary models, with respect to every main agricultural-climate area incidental projects and measures for optional use of land and water will be made ready .
In famine and flood prone areas, experienced farmers will be trained in the form of `` climate managers `` in the art of management of famine, flood and irregular monsoon .
Seeds: high quality seeds and disease free planting material in which in-vitro cultured propagules are present, is mandatory for crop productivity and safety .
Now in many crops hybrid varieties are being available .
Original (foundation) seed with respect to new sub-varieties will be offered to seed growers of basic level and their groups like co-operative societies and SHG .
Partnership in mutually beneficial farmer seed company will be encouraged .
Agricultural colleges will be encouraged for making syllabus on the main principles of trade in seed technology and trade and all practical courses .
One national seed grid will be established, by which, in the whole country, according to the specific expectations of different areas, supply of seeds will be assured .
Soil health: The key to increase the productivity of the farm is enrichment in soil health .
Every farmer family will be issued one soil health passbook on a permanent basis, in which along with corresponding advice, collective information about physical, chemical and microbiology related to the soil of their farm will be given .
For this purpose, to find the deficiency in the specific nutrient in the soil, many more laboratories will be established .
Including the leftovers of crop in the soil, soil organic (organic) matter will be increased .
With respect to the restoration of barren land and improving its nutrient capacity, proper technical advice will be made available .
For encouraging balanced use of fertilizers, fertilizer cost assessment policies will be reviewed .
Agricultural forestry will be encouraged for expert nutrient circulation, nitrogen assessment, bio resources boosting and improvement in exit system .
Insect repellents: there is a lot of damage every year of crops due to all three insects, pathogens and weeds .
Priority will be given to development, use and spread of environmentally safe and effective pesticides .
It is necessary to include use of chemical fertilizers in a Integrated Pest Management (IPM) system .
Useful quality control, safety measures and other regulatory systems will be made strong .
The sale of counterfeit and substandard level pesticides will be stopped and bio pesticides will be encouraged .
Machines: Farmers need machines and appliances specific to the area and crops so that timely sowing of seeds and handling of weeds and improving of after crop work can be done .
Women specially need favorable machines for themselves in which less labor is needed, productivity increases and time is saved and they can be used easily .
Agricultural graduates, agricultural entrepreneurs, and forward thinking farmers will be encouraged to make available appliances, tools, machinery, tractor and other big farm equipments on the basis of fee-rent .
Diagnosis about vaccines and serum: The main drawbacks in the provisions available now regarding important animal diseases will have to be eliminated .
Encouraging the public-private partnership, it is necessary to bring speed in bio-technology research in the field of vaccine development .
Fish seeds and food: High quality and disease-free fish seed is the key to successful national fishery .
Forward-thinking fishermen and their groups like self help groups (SHG) will be trained in fish seed breeding production and seeds and fish seed food will made available at sustainable costs .
For this proper technical help will be sought from National Fisheries Development Board and other agencies .
Fodder for animals: Insufficient nutrition only is the main reason for less production of milk in dairy animals .
For changing the cellulosic waste into a form of superior animal food through useful treatment and cultivation, planting of nutrition rich fodder plants and for spreading of technologies, encouragement will be given for both traditional and non-traditional techniques .
Other essential helpful services: Livestock areas will have to be made favorable for cleanliness and trees cleanliness .
A group of veterinary doctors will be trained so that co-operative service centers for the farmers can be established by which diseases will be known immediately and help will be available for their treatment and other animal medicare services .
Assistance services for the rights of women: For capacity building and livelihood for the women working on the farm there is a need for proper assistance services like day care and child care centers, nutrition, health and training .
There is a need for improvement in efficiency and outreach (outreach) of rural banking system .
For this, financial services at proper interest rates should reach the farmers at right time, in sufficient amounts and easily .
For facilitating good institutional loan for the farmers there is one agricultural loan policy of the Indian government .
Under the farmer credit card scheme measures will be taken for wide coverage of the farmers .
For encouraging production and reducing the loan risk, micro loan and micro insurance will be encouraged as one effective means .
In the rural financial system, loan co-operation has an important place and role and for improvement in co-operative loan institutions priority will be given to implement the recomendations of the Vaidyanathan Committee .
Centers will be established to give advice regarding loan where farmers in deep dept will be given loan relief package/facility for reassessment for saving them from debt trap .
Because farming is very high risk financial activity, so farmers need consumer-friendly insurance schemes under which production meaning from sowing to post-crop activities will be included .
In the insurance, for protecting the farmers from financial calamities, mandi risk regarding all the crops should be included and in this way farming should be made financially practical .
To make the National Agricultural Insurance scheme more favorable for the farmers, efforts will be made to bring improvement in it .
In villages both types of information of loan and insurance is needed .
In this work, knowledge joints (Village Information Centers) can be helpful .
Encouragement will be given to bring awareness in farmers about insurance and loan .
It is necessary to give special attention on women in matters of loan procurement due to their lack of land-ownership/backing .
Along with joint lease of house/farming land for women, farmer credit cards will be issued quickly .
Co-operative societies should work in the form of financial enterprises and not in work in the form of the extended department of the state .
They should achieve an industrious viewpoint, a competitive position through thr medium of useful entrepreneurial kendran and establish relations planned relations with public and private sector units .
A useful technique should be made through which a farmer can have more control on the market mediums and can get better opportunities of profit through co-operative societies and self help groups .
Looking at the financial liberalization and market competitiveness, co-operative societies will be need much more capital and other financial resources .
By changes in the legal framework and regulatory system help will be available for getting capital/financial resources .
It is necessary to make the management of co-operative societies more able commercially in which there will be a clear demarcation of the duties of the elected members and the managers .
The difference between scientific information and field level work has become much more in recent years .
This lack of knowledge will be speedily taken away by which there can be an increase in farm production and profitability .
The Agricultural Science Center will give training in the area of post-crop technology, agricultural processing and cost increasing of primary products and will organize exhibitions from laboratories to farms so that alert jobs can be made available in villages .
Along with agricultural science center, with contact with farm schools there will be a rush in the process of technological upliftment of crops and animal husbandry, fishery and agricultural forestry .
There will be a rush in the process of modern agricultural systems .
With the help of modern agricultural systems, efforts will be made to bring together farmers, researchers, retail sellers and other stakeholders .
Specially at the district level and level below it, integration of the expansion efforts will be fixed .
By establishing new information joints in villages, the capacity of I C T will be used .
Other than this the service centers of the Information Technology Department of the Indian Government and the centers established through the state government and privately initiated programs will be included for broad and widespread development .
In the framework of ICT based information system, in this way, establishment of such village centers will be included along with others .
Through co-ordination broadband internet till the last mill and the last person, public radio or internet-mobile phone will be provided .
To ensure assured livelihood, it is necessary to include farmers, specially small and tertiary farmers and landless agricultural laborers under one broad social security scheme .
So the government will take necessary measures to implement a right social safety scheme .
In increasing the agricultural output and profitability, providing opportunities for assured and profitable marketing is the main facet of continuous progress .
From first only many important market reforms have been done by the central and state governments .
Minimum Support Price (MSP) system will be implemented in the whole country in a more effective way .
Market Intervention Scheme (MIS), in case of emergencies, will be made strong to be implemented quickly, specially in rain harvested areas in case of sensitive crops .
Efforts will be done to develop Unitary National Market by giving concession on internal restrictions .
All the controls and regulations obstructing in the growth of income of the farmers will be inspected and they will be removed .
Terminal Markets will be developed for agriculture through public-private partnership .
Farmers need correct advice about land-use decisions and inputs based on meteorological science, trading and management information .
To reduce the post-crop loss and to increase employment and income at the village level only, basic facilities will be given for agricultural processing and value addition .
To incentivize crop processing industry, producer groups and co-operative societies will be encouraged .
Obstacles will be ridden away for betterment of negotiating warehouse income .
The objective of the trade policy in agriculture will be safeguarding the livelihood of the farmer families and making the financial situation of the farmers better .
For this an effective livelihood safety system of farmers will be implemented .
In the whole country quality and trade literacy programs will be started .
To reduce the cost risk and stakeholders, to save themselves, specially the farmers from the risk, proper measures will be taken .
By propagating the information about the available opportunities for Foreign Agricultural trade and value addition, farmer associations and SHG will be helped to export at competitive terms .
Agricultural export will be made more strong, so that such areas can be made, where farmers will get maximum price for their produce as much as possible .
This is an established fact that by value addition in agricultural products, the level of income of the farmers will be increased .
So it is necessary to integrate their yield with processing and other value addition chain activities .
Also, in the country, post harvesting infrastructure is totally insufficient due to which maximum inefficiency and waste is produced .
Adding value to their income, joining them to the market, bringing about improvement in the post-crop management and encouraging demand oriented farming, food processing industry is capable of giving long term financial stability to the farmers .
Other than this, it is also necessary to make food processing activities modern .
So to make this process attractive, effective measures will be taken to make this food processing area modern and increase it ` s competitiveness .
Among the farmers class, the tribal farmers are in the worst situation .
All over the country most tribal groups are dependent on forests and animal husbandry for their livelihood .
To do farming in this (in many parts zoom farming) includes collecting fuel, fodder and many types of non-timber forest products .
To bring about improvement in their financial situation is the priority of the government .
For this purpose the following activities will be done .
To ensure opportunities of better livelihood for the herdsmen the following measures will be taken .
Pastures and drinking water sources will be secured for the livestock and feasibility will be increased as much as possible .
Herdsmen will be made part of all the local natural resources management programs .
In which, village, forest committees and joint forest management in included .
Small farmers in big numbers are engaged in plantation farming of garden crops like tea, coffee, rubber, cardamom, black pepper and vanilla .
Fluctuation in prices and competition with products imported from abroad are included in some of those big problems faced by them .
So to protect them from the fluctuation of the market, they can get help from one price stabilizing fund for garden crops .
It is necessary to give special attention to farmer and fishermen families in Andaman and Nicobar island clusters and the Lakshwadeep island clusters and in other island clusters .
Areas of technology, training and technology settlement and trade are included in their needs .
Transportation cost is also an issue in the island farming, specially with respect to perishable items like fish which is to be sold on the mainland .
There are ancient tribes on the Andaman and Nicobar islands who have one rich traditional information and knowledge .
Measures will be taken to recognize and reward their local knowledge in the areas of bio-diversity protection and traditional health care .
As much as possible, garden development programs will be implemented in the islands .
With the purpose of keeping the life and livelihood in the islands safe in situations of calamities like increasing sea levels and tsunami due to increasing global warming, measures like creating mangrove and non-mangrove bio-shields will be done .
In the urban areas, house gardens and nursery ` s will be encouraged .
Nutritious food related gardens will be given support so that requirements regarding nutritious food will be fulfilled .
In India the organic farming campaign is not getting enough help from the institute in the areas of resources, development and marketing and for this scientific help is expected more than chemical farming.
Agricultural Science Centers will be made ready to give training in organic farming .
To make the farmers favorable and capable, internationally accepted certification activities will also be made strong .
Organic farming will be encouraged in the chosen rain affluent areas along with expected assistance in which marketing is also included .
This will be assisted through contract farming also .
Food protection and quality yardstick should be in accordance to the standards of codex alimentarius because sometimes there has been reports of presence of lots of metal in organic fertilizers .
Farmers engaged in the the work of organic farming should be joined with important markets where they will get premium prices .
To establish farmer-clinics and farmer occupational centers for organic farming forward-thinking farmers and agricultural graduates will be given backing .
Green farming, in which integrated pest management, integrated nutrition fulfillment and integrated natural resources management is included, has always been recognized as going towards ` Continuous Green Revolution ` .
Opposed to organic farming, under green farming is included safe and minimum use of mineral fertilizers and chemical pesticides and varieties of crops developed by genetic research .
Green farming products will be classified and encouraged through certificates like is done in the case of organic farming .
It is necessary to understand the risks and benefits related to G M crops in a credible and transparent way .
In genetic research inclusion of such genes should be given priority by which help will be gotten in stopping of famine, salinity and other pressures .
Efficient water usage and improvement in nutrition and processing quality will also have to be given priority in the research work-list .
In relation to G M varieties of crops training will have to be started to be given in farming management techniques and bring about awareness .
Along with steep progress in horticulture, water and fertilizer usage, like economical fertilizer systems, with the help of nutritious material through irrigation systems there are opportunities of green house farming of vegetables, fruits and flowers .
Under agricultural occupational programs and horticulture development programs, to do greenhouse domestic horticulture, agricultural and home science graduates and other endeavors will be given assistance .
Required assistance will be given for such technologies by which help can be gotten in increasing income in water scarce areas .
Many measures have been taken by the government to reduce the agriculture related problems seen in many parts of the country .
This is important that special attention should be given on such areas so that risk can be reduced and encouragement can be given to inputs for long term agricultural systems .
In such areas, information combination and social help systems and marketing framework should be made strong .
To be exhaustively benefited under different schemes will also be encouraged .
Due to slow increase in non-agricultural field work, small and non-profitable from economics viewpoint cultivation has increased .
To increase the income of farmers, by increasing the productivity of small farms and through crop-livestock integrated farming systems, creating many opportunities for livelihood, processing with be given support .
For small and tertiary farmers, principles of economic scale should be made popular by farmer groups for increasing productivity and income .
Women will be encouraged to take part in such group activities .
Some methods are illustrated below which small and tertiary farmers can adopt in farming activities for work efficiency and cost efficiency .
Co-operative farming and co-operative societies have been successful with respect to dairy industry .
Marketing Co-operative Societies have generally been successful because its members see an advantage and so help .
Other forms of service co-operation are emerging, but the speed has to be increased .
So for doing work related to processing, value addition and marketing of agricultural products, small agricultural co-operatives will be encouraged and help will be given to them .
Co-operative farming by Self Help Groups (SHG): SHG ` s have been successful in encouraging small ventures organized by women with the help of small loans .
With respect to `` green farming `` with integrated pest management, integrated nutrient fulfillment, scientific water management and advanced crop harvesting technology this has been especially helpful .
SHG ` s will also be encouraged to make loans available to the farmers easily .
Contract farming: Farmers will be encouraged for ensuring assured and profitable marketing opportunities .
For fulfilling the need for commodity specific farming co-operative farming code or a model farming code will be developed .
In co-operative farming a farmer will not be deprived of his land under any circumstances .
To encourage farmer favorable co-operative farming system, state governments should make a review committee in which farmers also be included .
Farmer companies: Private limited companies registered under the Company (amendment) Act, 2002 are now coming into the field of bio software production mandatory for seed production, production of bio-fertilizers, bio-pesticides and other types of farming .
Small farmers and SHG ` s will be included in these companies in the form of stakeholders and not in the form of shareholders .
State farms: Along with this, use of state farms can be done for developing gene banks of live germplasm of local varieties of animal, sheep, poultry by which our livestock genetic reserve can be safeguarded .
By the following tactical solutions, welfare and safety of livelihood of the farmers will be assured .
Main emphasis will be given on development of floriculture, roots and bulbous crops, aromatic medicinal plants, apiculture and sericulture .
These products will be given proper market connection so that by these efforts the opportunities for employment and earning can be increased in the rural areas .
Market intervention scheme will continue and it will be strengthened .
To eradicate rural poverty and malnutrition, it is very important to grow foodgrains in the domestic form and make a policy for safeguarding well-defined food .
To strengthen food safety and to monitor it regularly government will form a cabinet committee on food safety .
There is a necessity for a rural non-agriculture employment initiative for the farmer families .
By this initiative all rural non-agricultural employment programs should be integrated so that there can be a convergence and co-ordination among them .
Uniting all concerned different agencies one integrated strategy will be adopted .
It was evening time .
Farmers had assembled in the panchayat house of the village .
There was one question on front of all - how will yield increase, how can there be growth in farming .
Mahesh had come back to the village after getting higher education of an agricultural university .
The farmers looked at Mahesh in amazement .
Mahesh then said - Yes, I am speaking the truth, if farmers do farming deliberately and with intelligence, then yield can increase .
The farmer who does the farming of a crop, he should have full knowledge of that .
He has to have good information as to the seeds of that crop grow in which kind of soil .
How should the tillage-sowing of that soil be done, when should it be given water and when should it be weeded, etc. .
You have come studying a lot about farming .
Then you only tell all of us useful good things about crops .
Thinking something, Mahesh said - Good, I will first take pulses farming .
Because the importance of pulses in food is very large .
That crop is called pulses, by mashing which pulse are made .
Farming of wheat, barley and rice is done in every corner of the country .
In the same way crops of different pulses are also grown in the whole country .
But compared to other countries the average yield in our country is very less .
This yield can be increased manifold .
Its only solution is that farming be done in a scientific way .
Most farmers of our country just keep beating the rut .
They do efforts a lot but the yield in their farm is not more .
Mahesh said - Among pulses , the importance of split pigeon peas is most .
Split pigeon peas are eaten in all parts of our country .
Split pigeon peas is most used the in the eastern districts of Uttar Pradesh .
Split pigeon peas from Kanpur are considered the best .
The split pigeon peas from Kanpur are very delicious to eat .
It cooks fast, and gets mashed nicely .
But tell us this Mahesh Sir , since when did the introduction of split pigeon peas happen in our country ?
It is difficult to tell since when are people using split pigeon peas .
Some people are of the opinion that the birth place of the pigeon pea plant is India .
They give its proof that the large amount of farming of pigeon pea that is done in India , that much is not done in any other country in the world .
They also say that the use of split pigeon peas done in India is also more than other countries in the world .
The plant of pigeon pea was first in Africa .
They say, that the plant of pigeon pea was found growing like a wild plant in the valley of the Nile river in Africa .
The plant of pigeon pea is straight and stick-like .
This is counted under annual plants .
After the first yield, then not much yield is gotten .
From the viewpoint of shape we can call the pigeon pea plant as bushy plant .
In fertile soil it can grow up to a height of 7-8 feet .
The roots are tap in which small branches are attached .
The branches of the roots keep entering deep into the soil .
The roots are knotty
The stalk is strong and stick-like .
There are branches in pigeon pea plant .
The length of all branches is same .
Some branches are long, but some seem to be making a big angle from the stalk .
Pods grow on pigeon pea plant, which are two to four inch long and about half inch thick .
The color of the raw leaves is dark green, but when they ripe, then taking some redness they become brown colored .
Every pod has two to five peas which come out immediately on pressing .
There are two main varieties of the plant of pigeon pea - (1) Arahar and (2) Toor .
T 17 - Its split pea is very tasty .
It cooks fast .
Its plants are long, which spread .
T1 - This variety of plants especially grow in the soil of Gorakhpur district .
T19 - The crop of this variety is especially grown in the central area of Uttar Pradesh .
Its plants are straight which become about 7 feet tall .
In one acre from 20 upto 23 maund yield is obtained .
Farming of pigeon pea can be done in every type of soil; but mainly light soil, heavy soil, rocky soil and black soil is considered good .
Mainly farming of pigeon pea needs such a soil from which water can be cleared easily .
Because in moisture the development of pigeon pea plant does not happen, and due to one type of pests they wilt fast .
So while choosing the soil, this should be kept in mind that the soil in which farming of pigeon pea is being done, water is not accumulated near by or there is no fear of water getting collected .
Climate - Soil in which there is moisture, near by which there is muck or water, it is definite that in such soil the development of the plant of pigeon pea cannot happen .
Farming of pigeon pea is done along with winter crops .
This time is very useful for this .
Because in these days there is moisture in the climate due to rains along with high temperature .
This type of climate is best for the farming of pigeon pea .
This only is the reason that farming of pigeon pea is done along with winter crop .
But farming of pigeon pea also has to see the days of winter .
Whenever the temperature becomes less, or cold increases, then by that farming of pigeon pea is adversely affected .
There are two ways in which farming of pigeon pea is done, mixed and separate .
The meaning of mixed is, that along with the crop of pigeon pea other crops are along planted, like maize, millet, corn, etc. .
The best way is, that farming of pigeon pea be done with shuffling .
Where farming of pigeon pea is done with maize, millet and corn, there, as required, shuffling should be done among them .
Somewhere farming of pigeon pea is done separately also .
For good yield preparation of the farm also should be done well .
When the crop of pigeon pea is being grown with maize or millet, then the preparation of the farm should be done according to the crop of maize or millet .
When this crop is grown with oilseed crops or separately, then the farm should be prepared according to the crop of pigeon pea .
Generally for the crop of pigeon pea tilling with indigenous ploughs for three times is good .
After second-third tilling, on soil being leveled, patela should be done .
Only one tilling by new types of imported ploughs is enough .
The sowing time for the crop of pigeon pea is not same in all regions .
In Uttar Pradesh the crop of pigeon pea is sowed in the first week of July .
But in south India sowing of the crop of pigeon pea is started in the month of May .
Till whole of July the crop is sowed .
In Madhya Pradesh the process of sowing the crop continues from June till July .
In Bihar people sow the crop of pigeon pea in the last month of July .
Ideally all the farmers are familiar with the seed of pigeon pea, but lot of precaution should be taken before sowing the seeds .
Because there is a type of disease in the seed of pigeon pea, which is called Wilt meaning dryness .
This is not easily captured by sight .
It is better to take advice from experts before sowing the seeds .
The amount of seeds and the way of sowing depends on the variety of the seed .
In mixed crops per acre up to two to two and half quintal seeds are enough .
For growing separate crop per acre up to six to seven quintal seeds are required .
In the farming of ` toor ` seeds more than this are needed .
For the crop of pigeon pea sowing is done in two ways - (1) by sprinkling way, and (2) in the form of lines .
In separate farming of pigeon pea work is done only through sprinkling way .
In this way seeds are sprinkled by hand in the farm .
In the rows of pigeon pea a distance of up to one and half to two inch is measured .
The distance of main crop and rows of pigeon pea is up to six to ten inches .
Fertilizer: There is no need specially for fertilizer for growing the crop of pigeon pea .
Even then if use of calcium (lime) and phosphorus is done then good yield is obtained .
Per acre 32 pounds of phosphorus should be used .
To make the soil rich for the crop of pigeon pea use of super-phosphate, basic slag (Mal) and bone mill (powder of bones) should be done in it .
Almost 15 days before sowing the seeds fertilizer should be put in the soil .
By this the plants shoot up and help is gotten in their development and growth .
After fertilizer now tell about irrigation also .
Without irrigation there cannot be good yield .
But the crop of pigeon pea does not need special form of irrigation .
There are tow main reasons for this .
One is this, that the crop of pigeon pea is grown in those days when in the air there is lot of moisture .
So the crop of pigeon pea gets water from the air only .
Second is that, the roots of pigeon pea enter very deep inside the soil .
So they keep taking water according to their requirement from inside the soil only .
Even then in some special situations attention should be given on the irrigation of pigeon pea .
Weeding and digging of the crop of pigeon pea should be done with the same crop with which it is being grown .
Generally , digging of the plants is done up to the age of three months .
Usually digging is done only in those farms in which the seeds are sown in the row pattern .
Farms in which the seeds are sown in the sprinkling way , it is difficult to do digging .
In digging trowel, hoe, cultivator and harrow are used .
The digging by trowel is expensive .
In it more time is also taken .
The development of the crop of pigeon pea happens very slowly .
More time is also needed for the crop to get ready .
So it is not surprising for grass-weeds to grow in the farm .
Whenever this happens, the useless grass-weeds should be destroyed .
Which thing is there in this world which does not get affected by disease and ailment .
The crop of pigeon pea needs to be protected from many diseases and ailments .
So to get a good crop of pigeon pea it is necessary to have knowledge about this .
The crop of pigeon pea gets affected in two ways - (1) by diseases, and (2) by pests .
Among diseases ` Fusarium wilt ` is dangerous .
This happens due to a type of pests which are called ` Fusarium Udum ` .
This begins in the roots so roots decay .
The plant wilts .
There are three types of pests which affect the crop - (1) pests of leaves, (2) pests of legumes, and (3) flies of legumes .
The pests of leaves are called `` Ucilous cretica ``
These pests attack the upper part of the leaf and make a net .
These pests can be recognized by looking at the webs on the leaves only .
To catch and kill them is the only easy solution for their destruction .
In the harvesting of the crop mainly two things are to be focused on - 1. time of harvesting, 2. way of harvesting .
The crop of pigeon pea should be cut only when the legumes are fully ripened .
But while harvesting the crop attention should be paid on this that the legumes should not disperse and fall out .
In Mysore state of south India the legumes are removed from the plant before to protect them from falling out .
But in north India nowhere is work done in this system .
The harvesting of pigeon pea is done by sickle or blade .
In foreign countries this work is done by machines called ` mower ` and combine ` .
Cutting is done very close to the ground .
It is very essential to pay attention on the protection of the legumes at the time of cutting the stalk .
Filling the peas in bags , (they) are closed .
The bags are kept in such a place where there is proper level of heat .
By keeping in places with moisture and humidity the peas decay and they get infested with insects .
The yield and its use of any crop only has the most importance .
The crop of pigeon pea is of three types - (1) short term, (2) long term, and (3) mixed .
Pigeon pea is use in the form of pulses .
By splitting and skinning the seeds, two pulses are gotten .
The work of splitting and skinning is done by big machines .
The trading of split pigeon peas is done on high scale .
The pulses are useful for humans to eat and the animals eat the skin with great fondness .
The stalk of pigeon pea is used for making baskets, making roofs and in the form of fuel .
The pulse of pigeon pea is famous for its nutritious content also .
After split pigeon peas, split black peas are more popular .
In Punjab split black peas are only used .
People from western Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal and Madras also make more use of split black peas .
Black pea is different in its shape-type .
By seeing black pea only people recognize that it is black pea .
Its black and green color is very attractive .
But sometimes seeing green gram and black pea together, there is a confusion in recognizing them both .
Because both black peas and green gram are similar in shape-type and form-color .
But seeing by removing the skin, black gram is seen clearly .
The color pulse of black gram has yellowness which gives its identity different from green gram .
The birth place of black gram is India .
From India only the spread and promotion of black gram has happened in other countries of the world .
The experts in agriculture after investigating have declared that the plant of black gram is related to the plant of Papilionaceae of the Leguminosae family .
In Hindi we can call it a bushy plant .
It is bushy in shape-type .
It is spreading and grows up to one to two feet tall .
The stalks of black gram are straight and have branches .
The stalks and branches are full of long brown colored hair .
Due to these hair only in some countries people call black gram ` Uli paaydaal ` .
The leaves are of attractive dark green color .
Like leaves the flowers which are in bunches are beautiful .
When the legumes come on the branches, then it is such a sight .
The legumes are furry, which are up to two to three inch in length .
The farming of black gram is done in two ways - (1) in mixed form, and (2) separately .
In both the forms separate soil is needed .
But there are only two forms of it - loose and sandy .
For independent farming of black gram sandy clayey soil is the best .
A good crop of black gram can also be grown in silted soil .
For the mixed form, somewhere sandy clayey and somewhere sandy soil is considered good .
The crop of black gram is grown in two forms - 1. In the form of summer crop, 2. In the form of winter crop .
In the form of summer crop, sowing is done in the month of February and harvesting in the month of May .
Farming of black gram can be done in the form of summer crop only in those areas where even in the winter days there is heat .
The crop of black gram of summer has the fear of damage due to cold and frost .
So the crop of summer cannot be grown in those areas where the temperature is very low .
The places in which the temperature is low, there a good crop of black gram cannot be grown .
In such places the pea of black gram is very light and small .
The crop of black gram is grown in two ways - (1) in mixed form, (2) separately .
When the crop is to be grown in mixed form, then it can be alternated with maize, millet and corn .
But when the crop of black gram is to be grown separately then it is more useful to alternate it with wheat .
On alternating with wheat if a fast growing variety of seed is sown, then good yield can be obtained .
The crop of black gram does not need that much ploughing , as much (is needed) for wheat .
Generally, three times ploughing by indigenous ploughs is considered good .
After every ploughing trowel should be given .
By this the soil becomes crumbly .
If soil flipping ploughs are used, then the farm gets ready in two ploughings only .
From the intention of pulses mostly people do farming of black gram in mixed form only .
Black gram is mixed with other pulses crops - pigeon pea, cotton, maize, millet, savan, kondaa and corn etc. .
In growing the crop in mixed form mostly the sowing of seeds is done by sprinkling method .
But this method is not proper .
If for sowing seeds the method of machines is adopted, then it is good .
If it is not easy to sow seeds by machines, then should be sown in rows in troughs behind he plough .
While sowing seeds it should be kept in mind, that the distance between them is same .
By not keeping in mind the distance somewhere the plants grow more, and somewhere the farm seems empty .
In the form of separate crop also, the farming of black gram is done for pulses only .
But there are very few areas or regions, where the crops of black gram are grown separately .
If the crop of black gram is grown separately for pulses, then in that too the sowing of seeds has to be done according to mixed crop .
Before sowing the seeds if advice is taken from government agricultural experts, then it is good .
At the time of choosing the seeds for sowing, the said recommendations of the regional governments should definitely be taken into consideration .
In sowing, it is also very essential to take care of the amount of seeds and the distance of the rows .
On growing the crop in the mixed form per acre up to two to three kilo seeds should be put .
In separate crop the result of the seed per acre is up to four to six kilos .
On sowing with the sprinkling method per acre up to six to eight kilo seed is required .
The sowing of seeds is done in three ways - (1) by sprinkling method (2) behind the ploughs, and (3) by machines .
For the crop of black gram it is necessary to put fertilizer in it after getting the farm ready .
By fertilizers help is gotten in the development of the plant, and the yield is good .
For good yield of black gram nitrogen based fertilizer is good .
By putting fifteen kilo per acre nitrogen based fertilizer, the fertility of the farm increases more .
After sowing by putting up to twenty to twenty-five kilo silicate (fertilizer) per acre help is gotten in the development of the plant .
But that fertilizer should be put at the time, when plants come up in the farm and become little big .
Farming of black gram is done in those days when they are the days of raining, and there is enough moisture in the soil .
So generally the crop of black gram does not need irrigation .
In the days of dryness when it does not rain or the ground is very dry then there is benefit in doing irrigation .
Four-five weeks after sowing the seeds, weeding of the crop of black gram should definitely be done once .
After this if necessity is seen then second time also weeding-digging can be done .
Use of trowel, hoe and cultivator is done for weeding-digging .
In doing weeding-digging by trowel more expense and labor is needed .
Cultivator are driven by bullocks .
But use of cultivator can be done in only those farms, in which sowing is done in the form of rows .
For weeding-digging of farms sowed by sprinkling method, hand trowel is good .
There are it ` s two main enemies damaging the crop of black gram - (1) diseases and (2) pests .
Among diseases ` with harad ` and ` with ghaati ` are two main .
When the attack of these diseases happens, then white and dusky lines are formed on the leaves of black gram .
The solution for eradication from these diseases is, that the leaves on which the white and dusky lines are seen, those should be cut and destroyed .
Among pests ` baalkeet ` and kavachkeet ` are main .
Baalkeet are furry small in shape .
The female is very smart in laying eggs on the leaf (and) increasing its number .
These pests eat the leaves .
Consequently the crop gets destroyed .
To destroy these pests bright lighting should be done in the farm at night .
In bright light the pests on their own fall off leaving the crop .
And burning die .
The crop of black gram is of two types depending on its variety - 1. short term, and 2. long term .
The short term crop ripening gets ready in two and half months .
The time of its harvesting is August and September .
Every long term crop according to its virtue gets ready by October to November .
The harvesting of the crop of black gram should be done only after the ripening of the legumes .
But legumes should not ripen much such that the peas fall off at the time of harvesting .
So harvesting should be done before fully ripening .
In cutting the crop use of sickle should be done .
In some places instead of cutting the plant, the legumes are picked and they are dried in barns .
Then using a chaff cutter the peas and chaff are separated .
Filling the peas in bags are closed .
Sometimes from the barn itself the bags of peas are sold .
Sometimes the bags are kept in the houses to sell and for the purpose of personal use .
Generally the yield of high quality seeds of black gram is eight to ten pounds per acre .
From normal seeds up to five to six pounds of yield is gotten per acre .
Black gram is used in the form of pulses .
The pulse of black gram has the capacity to increase strength and virility .
People make papadums, fried balls, dumplings, and imarati etc. of black gram too .
In the south, mixing black gram with rice a special food-item is made, which is very tasty .
Like black gram, green gram is also used for pulses .
Green gram is of two types - with skin and skinned .
Both the pulses are light and digestive .
Often green gram pulse is given as diet for patients .
Green gram is India ` s own pulse .
The birth place of its plant is India .
From here only its publicity and spread happened in foreign countries .
Farming of green gram in some amount is done in almost all states in India .
Green gram is specially grown in regions like Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan .
The plant of green gram is very much similar to the plant of black gram .
The plant of green gram is up to two to two and half feet in length .
The leaves are bigger and lesser than leaves of black gram .
The stalks are somewhat bigger and thicker than stalks of black gram .
The length of the legumes is almost up to three to four inches .
Agricultural scientists have developed many varieties of green gram .
But from the viewpoint of seeds two varieties among them are considered important - (1) green color ones and (2) golden color ones .
Other than this, black, brown and grey color green gram is also considered good .
The farming of green gram is done mixing with other crops .
So for the yield of green gram special type of soil is not needed .
At the time of choosing the soil for this, that crop has to be kept in mind with which it is to be grown .
Generally for the farming of green gram all types of soil are good .
Only loose and sandy soil is such a soil which is not useful for the farming of green gram .
Other than this in all types of soil farming of green garm can be done .
This only is the reason that the crop of green gran is grown in all states .
The crop of green gram is grown with both summer and winter crops .
Along with winter crops the sowing of green gram is done in the months of June and July .
In these days along with moisture there is lot of heat in the air too .
During the days of winter crop it is raining .
So it is certain, that for the yield of green gram, water is essential .
With the summer crop sowing of green gram is done in the month of October .
In these days cold starts, so there is moisture in the air .
But in those places where there is more cold, on growing green gram with the summer crops, good yield is not got .
Because for good yield of green gram, along with moisture, high level of temperature is also needed .
The crop of green gram is grown with summer and winter crops only .
So it can be alternated with summer and winter crops only .
Alternating is useful .
By alternating crops the yield is more .
Green gram can be alternated with maize, millet and corn .
Places in which crop of green gram is grown with rice crops, there rice and green gram can be alternated .
On growing the crop of green gram with summer crops its alternation should be done with summer crops .
Alternation of green gram can also be done with pigeon pea and cotton .
The crop of green gram is grown with other crops .
So for the crop of green gram, farm does have to be gotten ready separately .
The crop with which the crop of green gram is grown, along with the preparation of the farm of that, the preparation of the farm of crop of green gram also gets done .
Even then to make the soil loose trowel should be used after tilling for two times in the farm .
For the crop of green gram two times tilling is enough .
When crop of green gram is to be grown in the farm of rice, then after digging of rice without tilling the seeds should be sprayed in the farm .
The topic of sowing seeds comes in front after the farm is ready .
If good crop has to be grown then attention should be paid on two things - 1. Good quality of seeds, and 2. proper method of sowing .
There are many types of seeds of good varieties of green gram .
Which has been announced by the agriculture-department of the Government of India after a lot of investigation .
Sowing is done in two ways - by sprinkling method, and in rows .
For growing the crop of green gram in the farm of rice, sprinkling way is only used .
But where the crop of green gram is to be grown with other crops, there seeds of green gram are sown mixing with the seeds of the other crop .
These types of mixed seeds also are sown by sprinkling and row-method .
In the sprinkling method of sowing attention is not paid to the distance .
But in sowing in the row method, a distance of one and half feet is kept between two rows .
In the same way in distance between two plants also there is a difference of one and half feet .
For the crop of green gram there is not special need to put fertilizer in the farm .
Because this is a mixed crop .
The crop with which the crop of green gram be grown, fertilizer should be put in the farm according to the nature of that .
Even then if need arises silicate (fertilizer) should be used .
By using silicate (cow dung, bones etc.) the development of the plant happens well .
In this way, good yield is obtained .
There is very little need of irrigation for the crop of green gram .
There are two main reasons for this .
One is this, that the crop of green gram is grown in those days when the days are of rain .
And the other is this, that its roots go very deep inside the soil .
The crop of green gram keeps getting the water from the rain, along with that, its roots taking water from inside the ground keep fulfilling their requirement .
So the crop of green gram needs very little water from canal or well, even then the crop of green gram grown with summer crop sometimes can need water .
When the crops start drying due to decrease in moisture, then by doing irrigation, the plant gets a new life .
The crop of green gram takes a long time to get ready .
So in crop of green gram, there is no need for weeding and digging specially .
Even then, in mixed crop, weeding and digging should be done based on the main crop .
The diseases and pests of green gram are the same, which affect black gram, that is like black gram, green gram also has the fear of getting damaged by two main diseases and pests .
Among diseases one is called ` dhaariwala ` and other ` haradewala ` .
On infliction of the disease white or brownish colored lines appear on the leaves .
The result of these diseases is this, that the leaves becoming weak become dry .
From the point of view of getting ready of the crop of green gram there are two types - (1) that gets ready in short time, and (2) that gets ready in long time .
Short term crops get ready in two-and-half-three months .
The crops which are sowed in July, get ready in October .
The crops sowed in September are long term , they get ready in February .
The cut plants are sent to barns after tying them in bales .
After some days when the plants become dry, a chaff chopper of bullocks is used on it after spreading them .
Making the powder fly in the air, the chaff and peas are separated .
Per acre five pounds of yield of green gram is obtained, and chaff ten pounds .
In some places per acre the peas become ten pounds, and chaff ten pounds too .
Mostly it is seen, that there is good yield in long term crops compared to small term crops .
The peas obtained by great efforts are kept tied in bags or filled in pots .
The seeds of green gram have more fear of getting damaged by pests .
The pests affect only those areas either which are dirty, or where there is moisture .
So efforts should be made to protect the bags and pots filled with peas from moisture .
Green gram is specially used as pulses .
Split green gram is very light and digestive .
Split green gram has many nutrients, which are very useful for the body .
Some people consider it a foreign plant .
Whatever, the farming of red lentils is done specially in many states in India .
Yield of red lentils is good in regions like Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Punjab, Bengal and Madras and Rajasthan .
Like other pulses Indian Agricultural Experts have researched a lot about red lentils too .
Testing has been done in many regions in India about red lentils .
Generally also there are two varieties of red lentils - one big seeded, and other small seeded .
The big red lentil of big seeds is considered good .
There is a lot of similarity between the red lentil and chickpea plant .
So it will not be improper to call the plant of red lentil a bushy plant .
The plant of red lentil is 7 inch to 1 foot tall .
The roots are fibrous and stalks have branches .
Leaves are small and spiky .
Flowers are blue color and legumes a little bigger than chickpea in shape .
From the color-form and size-type of red lentil and chickpea, it is understood that both these are of one family .
All crops have their own different qualities and nature .
Red lentil also has its own nature .
So red lentils also needs a special type of soil .
For good yield of red lentils it is beneficial to sow it in clayey moist or moist soil .
Generally its sowing is done in the month of October, and by end of February and March ripening the crop gets ready .
According to the quality and nature of red lentils, for it moist and warm climate is needed .
But more moisture is also damaging for red lentils .
Places in which it gets very cold, or in winter days when frost falls, then there is adverse effect on the yield of red lentils .
In some places people sow it with mustard and barley .
In some places with other grains, like - red lentils are also grown with linseed and wheat .
In some places after cutting the crop of rice, red lentil farming is done separately also .
In the same way, the farms in which in some one year rice may be sown, then second year, by sowing red lentils in it, good yield is obtained .
After cutting the crop of rice if the crop is to be grown in the field of rice, then in the preparation of farm, ploughing is not necessary .
In growing mixed crop, the preparation of the field is to be done according to the main crop only .
If the crop is to be grown with barley, then the field should be prepared based on barley .
For good yield of red lentils, it is not necessary for the soil to be crumbly .
The crop of red lentil grows well in lumpy soil .
The sowing of the seeds of red lentils is done in two ways - (1) sprinkling (2) row-wise .
Those people who grow the crop of red lentils along with the crop of rice, or after cutting the crop of rice in the same farm, they use only the sprinkling method .
In many places where farming of red lentils is done independently, the seed is sowed by the sprinkling method only .
In many places, for growing with mixed crops also this same method is used .
For good yield, good seeds are required .
Just by doing sowing in a scientific way good yield is not obtained .
The agriculture experts of the Indian Government have recommended N.P.No 11 for seeds of red lentils .
By using these seeds in sowing, good yield is obtained .
For the crop of red lentils there is a need for fertilizer .
By use of 20 kilo fertilizer per acre the yield of the field increases .
If crop of red lentils is to be grown in the farm of rice, and if in it bone powder fertilizer has been used, then there is no need to put fertilizer the second time .
Agriculture experts say, that there are a certain kind of insects under the ground in the farm of red lentils, which taking nitrogen from the soil keep supplying it to the plant .
So nitrogen fertilizer should not be put in the farm of red lentils .
Fertilizer should be used at the time of preparing the fields and after the plants have sprouted .
Sometimes in farming only red lentils, in the farms, wild grass-blades grow .
They stop the growing of the plant .
So whenever wild grass-blades or weeds grow, then they should be totally destroyed by weeding .
If by some reason the soil of the field becomes hard, then it should be made lumpy and soft by digging .
The plant of red lentil is one such plant, in which there is strength to tackle all kind of diseases .
Even then sometimes ` fungal ` disease, which many people also call rust, proves damaging for the crop of red lentils .
The attack of this destructive disease happens on the leaves and stalk .
By which the leaves become dry and stalks become weak .
To protect the crop from this destructive disease the diseased plant should be dug up and thrown .
Sometimes some special type of insects from the moth family also harm the crop of red lentils .
The attack of these insects happens on the legumes of red lentil .
These insects can be destroyed by spraying water mixed with kerosene .
When the legumes ripen the plant should be dug up .
Some people cut the crop with sickle too .
It is necessary to keep this in mind that the peas of the legumes do not fall off in the field .
The cut crop should be kept together in the barn tied in bales .
On drying, after spreading a daayam of bullocks should be run over it .
Later the peas and the husk should be separated .
The peas of red lentils are kept filled in bags or pots .
The places where the bags and pots are kept are filled with husk .
This is done so that, the effect of the moisture of the walls and floor does not fall on the bags and pots .
Because due to moisture the peas become bad and get infected with pests .
Red lentils is used in the form of split peas .
Split red lentils are of two types - (1) whole black red lentil with skin and (2) skinned whole red lentils .
Effect of black red lentil is cold and the effect of skinned red lentil is warm .
In winter days people eat skinned split red lentils more .
Chickpea is the main yield of India .
In our country farming of chickpea is done in two crore acres of land .
There is no such region where farming of chickpea is not done .
Chickpea is specially grown in Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh .
The crop of chickpea is grown in 60 thousand acres of land in Uttar Pradesh alone .
Chickpea is a bushy plant .
It is 8 inches to one and half feet in length .
The stalk is straight and branched .
The leaves are small and dentate .
The flowers of chickpea are blue and small in shape .
The legumes are attached to the flowers only .
The legumes are small, in which is the seed of chickpea .
In each legume there is one to three peas .
The fruits are attached to the stalks, which are covered with leaves .
From the viewpoint of color and peas there are many varieties of chickpeas, in which the white and yellow color chickpea is considered main .
White chickpea is called kabuli chickpea .
Yellow color chickpea grows maximum in Uttar Pradesh .
Other than these there are red and black color chickpeas too .
For farming of chickpea, land with moist, loose moist and moldy soil is good .
Light soil is not good for farming of chickpea .
Chickpea is also grown on the banks of rivers or islands .
Sowing of chickpea happens in October and in March the crop is harvested .
For the yield of chickpea moisture is needed along with warm climate .
In mixed form chickpea is grown with linseed, mustard, barley and wheat .
By doing farming of chickpea with these crops the yield of chickpea is good .
Because there are such types of nutrients in these crops, which prove very useful for chickpea .
On farming chickpea in a mixed form, the crops with which it is being grown should be shuffled .
Like, one year it is being grown with barley, then second year it should be grown with wheat, mustard or linseed in the same field .
If chickpea has to be grown separately, chickpea, paddy and chickpea, wheat and corn and hari-chari should be shuffled .
By shuffling with mustard and linseed also good crop is obtained .
The crop of chickpea is grown in two types of fields - (1) In the field of winter crops, and (2) in independent fields .
If farming if chickpea is to be done in the field of winter crops then after cutting the crop the seed should be sprayed after ploughing the field once .
Sowing of chickpea is done after the rains are over .
Sowing starts in the first week of October .
Sowing is also done on banks of rivers or islands later .
But if sowing is done earlier then there is a possibility of the crop being good .
For good crop it is necessary to have good seeds .
The agriculture experts of the Indian Government have announced many advance types of seeds of chickpea .
They have demonstrated different seeds for different regions .
Sowing of seeds of chickpea is done in two ways - spraying and row-wise .
In Punjab the seed is sowed by spraying only .
But this method cannot be called scientific .
If seed be sowed in rows then the crop can grow well .
How can good yield be obtained without putting fertilizer?
For the crop of chickpea nitrogen and prasphutik fertilizer is useful .
The crop becomes good by putting 20 kilo Nitrogen fertilizer per acre .
Good yield of chickpea is obtained by putting cow dung fertilizer .
Bone powder and super phosphate can also be used for fertilizer .
By putting two and half pounds of bone powder per acre, the fertility of the field increases a lot .
The crop of chickpea is grown in both ways, mixed and separate .
On growing in mixed form irrigation should be done according to the main crop .
Like, if farming of chickpea is done with wheat or barley then irrigation should be done according to wheat or barley .
On banks of rivers and islands there is no need for irrigation .
In winter days there is a fear of frost affecting the crop of chickpea .
But when in winter days it rains, then the fear of frost affecting keeps going .
If there are no rains, then to protect the crop from frost, irrigation should be definitely done .
There is no need to do weeding-digging for the crop of chickpea .
But sometimes when wild grass-blades grow in the field then it is beneficial to do weeding-digging .
More than weeding-digging, there is more importance of clipping in the crop of chickpea .
This means that when the plants of chickpea become 6-7 inches, then their top sprouts should be cut .
The effect of this is that more branches sprout in the plant and more flowers-fruits are also borne .
There are two main enemies of the crop of chickpea - (1) disease and (2) pests .
Among the diseases of the crop of chickpea ` dryness ` is the most dangerous disease .
Some people also call it ` wilt ` .
This dries the plants .
Agricultural scientists have discussed two reasons for its cropping up .
One it crops up at that time, when there is deficit in the nutrients in the soil of the farm .
Or it happens then, when lots of useless grass-blades grow in the field .
Whichever may be the reason, but the plants on which the wilt disease is seen should be put away from the field uprooting them .
Because such plants also affect other plants .
Among other diseases of the crop of chickpea ` rust ` meaning ` hardaa ` and ` blight ` meaning fungal disease are more dangerous .
The other enemies of the crop of chickpea are special kind of insects .
These insects are of the butterfly family .
They, engulfing the leaves in circle, eat them .
It is very much needed to protect the crop from these destructive insects .
For destroying them the affected plants should be destroyed after selecting them or efforts should be made to destroy them by spraying water mixed with kerosene .
They enter inside the fruits also, and eat the peas .
To protect the crop from these caterpillars they should be killed in the egg stage only .
Then those caterpillars are not born from them, which destroy the crop .
The crop of chickpea ripening gets ready to be cut by the end of phalgun or beginning of chaitra .
When the leaves start becoming of yellow color, then it is to be understood, that now the crop has started to ripen .
Along with leaves, chickpea starts becoming dry, and legumes also become of yellow color .
After madaai when the weather becomes favorable , then using winnowing basket or basket winnowing is done .
At some places winnowing is done with a machine called ` winnower ` .
By winnowing the peas and husk are separated .
Per acre 10 to 15 pounds of yield of chickpea is obtained .
For keeping the chickpea safe people keep them in warehouses, filling them in bags, or filling them in pots .
Chickpea is used in many ways .
Like - (1) in the form of split peas , (2) making flat breads , (3) making various types of side dishes .
Many people mixing the flour of chickpea with wheat or barley make flat breads .
Scientists say, that such type of flat breads are highly beneficial for health .
What to say about split chickpeas!
Many people mixing split chickpeas with mixed pulses cook (it).
Many people eat split chickpeas after cooking .
Chickpea flour is made from split chickpeas, from which many types of salty and sweet savories are made .
Not only humans, but animals also eat chickpeas fondly .
Chickpea is very nutritious .
Labor doing animals get back their lost strength eating chickpeas only .
Whatever, peas have been grown in India from ancient times .
Farming of peas is done in all parts of India in large amounts .
The plants of peas climb up on getting support, if not spread on the ground .
In most farms the plants are spread on the ground .
The stalks are 2 to 4 inch tall, hollow and of deep green color .
Branches grow from the stalk, which bear the leaves .
The number of leaves is from one to six .
Flowers are white, pink and light blue in color .
The legumes grown on the flowers .
Which are 1 to 4 inch long .
Every legume has 4 to 8 peas .
The peas are white, sticky and round .
Agricultural experts in India have done a lot of research about peas .
After research they have declared many varieties of it .
According to experts N.P. 29, and N.P. 163 are the main varieties of peas .
Indigenous peas is a fertilizer hungry crop .
The soil in which there is more amount of phosphorus and calcium (limestone), that is considered good for the farming of peas .
Peas is sowed in the month of Ashwin .
Ripening gets ready in February and March month .
From the time of sowing to harvesting many kinds of changes occur in the climate - (1) warm (2) moist (3) cold and (4) warm .
Peas has to survive in all these types of climates .
In the beginning peas needs warm-humid climate .
More cold is not good for peas .
In winter days when in some years there is more cold or snow falls then there is bad effect on the crop of peas .
The crop of peas is grown in two ways - (1) along with summer crops (2) in the farms of winter crops .
Indigenous peas is sown with barley and wheat .
At some places (it) is sown with mustard and linseed .
By growing the crop in the mixed form there is no need for shuffling .
The preparation of the farm should be done according to the main crop, with which peas are to be grown .
If the crop of peas is to be grown separately then the preparation should be done keeping in mind the nature of peas .
For a good crop of peas it is necessary to do good ploughing of the farm .
Generally it is good to plough the farm of peas two-three times with an indigenous plough .
To make the soil loose it is necessary to run a trowel after ploughing .
For growing imported peas, people make canals after ploughing .
This makes it easy to irrigate the plants .
At some places in farms of indigenous peas also canals are made after sowing .
In sowing of peas mainly three things should be concentrated on - (1) time (2) seeds (3) method of sowing seeds .
The sowing of peas is generally done in the month October .
But in places where winter starts early, there people sow the seeds of peas in September only .
In hilly areas, where the climate is cold, crop of peas is grown in summer days too .
Peas is leguminous crop .
It takes nitrogen at the rate of 40 kilos per acre from the soil itself .
So there is no need to put fertilizer in the farms of peas in which there are elements of nitrogen .
Phosphorus and calcium rich fertilizers are more useful for farms of peas .
Use of fertilizer of cow dung also has very good effect on the yield of peas .
After sowing if proper growth of the plant is not happening then using phosphorus and lime helps the development of the plant .
People also call peas grown with the intent of vegetables as imported peas .
Imported peas specially needs water .
Because in those days it is warm .
By not irrigating there is a fear of it ` s plant becoming dry .
For good yield of imported peas it is necessary to irrigate it two times .
Yield of local peas also is good by irrigating once .
On sowing with mixed crop the irrigation of peas is done along with the main crop .
There is not much need for weeding-digging in the crop of peas .
Even then if some grass-blades grow in the field or if the plants are too close then the plants benefit by weeding-digging .
Attention should be definitely given on weeding-digging for the yield of imported peas because imported peas is an unseasonal crop .
It ` s existence or non-existence depends of the activities of farming only .
To protect peas from frost it is necessary to irrigate it .
Damage to legumes of peas is also done by birds and animals .
To protect the crop from them, guarding of the crop has to be done in a proper way .
Small insects of the family of moths also damage the crop of peas .
People start using legumes of peas for making vegetable in the month of January itself .
But cutting of the entire crop is done from March until April .
When the legumes become ripe and the stalks start to dry, then the crop should be harvested .
By letting to dry more in the field there is a fear of the peas falling out during cutting .
Fifteen to twenty pounds of yield of peas is obtained per acre .
Where there is no provision for irrigation, there the yield is only 7-8 pounds per acre .
In good fields upto 40 pounds of green legumes are obtained per acre .
Use of peas is mainly done in two ways - (1) in the form of split peas, and (2) in the form of vegetable .
Till recently farming of soya bean was not done in India .
Now its farming is being done in the low lying areas of the mountains of Himalayas .
Soya bean is a foreign plant .
In the scientific language soya bean is called ` Glycin max ` .
It ` s plant is straight and of green color .
The height of the plant is 1 foot to 6 feet .
The stalk is branched and furry .
The leaves are three-lobbed .
The color of the flowers is white or yellow .
The seeds are inside the legumes .
The length of the legumes is 1 to 1 inch .
The legumes are furry .
The color of the seeds is yellow, green, black or brown .
The seeds of some varieties are white and buff colored also .
From the viewpoint of seeds there are three main varieties of soya bean - (1) yellow-green colored soya bean (2) white colored soya bean (3) buff and black colored soya bean .
The crop of soya bean can be grown in all kinds of farms .
Even then light moist soil is best for the farming of soya bean .
Farming of soya bean is also done on the mountains at the height of 4 thousand to 7 thousand feet .
In such places also good yield of soya bean can be grown, where water stays collected .
Because pool of water does not have bad effect on the yield of soya bean .
The farming of soya bean is still in it ` s nascent stage in India .
Agricultural-scientists are busy researching about it now .
Till now this has not been known, as to, by shuffling with which crops is good yield of soya bean obtained .
To grow a crop in mixed form the field has to be prepared according to the main crop .
Soya bean is a summer crop .
It ` s sowing is done in the middle of June .
At some places people sow the seeds in July too .
Agricultural scientists have recommended Type 3, Type 6, Type 10 for seeds .
So for sowing efforts should be made to get these seeds only .
Advanced seeds are available in local or regional agricultural-departments and shops of the Indian government .
According to it ` s nature, like other pulses soya bean too absorbs nitrogen at the rate of 45 kilo per acre from the soil .
So there is no need to give nitrogen fertilizers to soya bean .
For the growth of the plant and increase of yield prasphutik fertilizers are good .
(If) fertilizer of powder of bones is given then good crop of soya bean is obtained .
Not much effort is needed for growing the crop of soya bean .
It takes from three to five months of time for the crop of soya bean to ripen .
The crop should be cut before the legumes are fully ripe .
If the legumes are left to dry in the field only, then the peas fall off at the time of cutting and loss has to be borne .
After cutting the plants should be collected in the barns and should be left for drying .
Then with the process of husking and shelling, seeds-husk should be separated .
In a general field of soya bean per acre from 4 to 5 pounds of yield is obtained .
In good fields per acre from 10 upto 12 pounds of yield is obtained .
In some special types of fields per acre upto 1500 pounds yield is obtained .
As much is the yield, it ` s double husk is obtained .
Soya bean is used in many ways - (1) in the form of green fertilizer, (2) in making flat breads and biscuits, (3) in the work of making milk and (4) as pulses .
Split peas of soya bean are very good for health .
Big scholars of dietetics say that the split peas of soya bean have as much nutrients, as much are in the milk of buffalo .
In countries like China and Japan many types of items of food are prepared from split peas of soya bean .
Moth is also called by different names .
Some people call moth moth and some people also call it mataki .
The original birth-place of moth is said to be the region of Himalaya .
Some people also believe the birth-place of moth Lanka .
Whatever, the spread of moth in foreign countries happened from India only .
These days farming of moth is done in huge proportions in United States of America and China .
All of you know this, that the plant of moth is small and furry .
The height of the stalk is upto about 1 foot .
This stays spread on the ground from 2 inch to 3 inch .
The stalk is branched .
The lower branches are spread on the ground .
The upper branches are upright .
The leaves are of three leaflets, which are divided in three to five parts .
The flowers come on the petiole .
The legumes are from one to two inch long .
The seeds are inside the legumes .
The color of the seeds is light brown or of green color .
Moth is of two types - (1) moth of brown skin and (2) moth of green skin .
The moth of brown skin is also called lobiya .
The sowing of moth is done in the days of monsoon and till October there is warmth along with moisture in the climate .
So moth needs warm weather along with moisture .
People grow the crop of moth with maize-millet .
Crop of moth is very rarely grown alone .
But where some people grow the crop of moth alone , there the shuffling of the crop of moth is done with wheat , barley etc summer crops .
For only growing crop of moth, ploughing by indigenous ploughs for two-three times is enough .
May be in those fields crop of moth is grown separately, in which the summer crops are cut .
After the rain falls, when the soil becomes moist, then ploughing should be done in the fields .
After ploughing, making the soil flat, seeds should be sown .
To grown the crop of moth with mixed crops, per acre one to one and half kilo of seeds are necessary .
But when the crop has to be grown separately, then per acre four kilo seeds should be sown .
Like all other crops of pulses, the plants of moth also keep taking nitrogen from the soil .
So moth does not need nitrogen fertilizers .
Experiments have shown that, if phosphate is used in the fields of moth then the crops grows well .
The crop of moth is sown in the days of monsoon .
Grown and ripens too in the days of monsoon .
So there is no need to irrigate the crop of moth .
But when there is scarcity of water of rain and the crop starts drying, then it becomes necessary to irrigate .
The crop of moth takes a time of 4 months to ripen .
If the crop is used for fodder, then the crop should be cut after the legumes sprout .
For peas the crop should be cut on ripening of the legumes .
Use of moth in the form of pulses is more .
Like split green gram split moth is also light and easy to digest .
Some people make flour of moth, and make flat breads mixing it with flour of wheat .
Many people eat fried peas of moth .
Some people make use of the peas of moth with vegetables also .
Moth cures the ailments of cough and acid .
There are such elements in the peas of moth which keep the stomach well .
Farming of grass peas has been done in India from ancient times .
Grass peas has gone to foreign countries from India only .
Loan limit is decided without keeping in mind the loan payback capacity .
The work of disbursing loan is done throughout the year, not only at the time of sowing and cutting the crop .
Where there is scarcity of farming equipment, there, preparation for annual credit limit distribution goes waste .
The main work of Land Development Banks is to give loan to members on mortgage of land .
(They) provide loan facility for the following activities to farmers keeping the members ` land, house, agriculture related equipment mortgage or pawn, like - .
To improve agricultural land and agricultural technique, like leveling the land, making barren and infertile land fertile, digging wells, making ridges, irrigation, creating resources and giving them a solid form .
Making provision for long term loan for buying agricultural machines-equipment .
To make agricultural house, dam, canal, godown, cattle shed .
Land Development Banks are expanding loan activities for development of agriculture assisting businesses like dairies, poultry, doing fruit farming, cow dung gas plant, windmills .
Giving loans to farmers on low rates so that they do not become victims of the exploiting nature of the moneylenders .
To work in the form of a link between long term banking and National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development NABARD and the government .
For the solution of problems of land and its use, to make necessary counseling easy for the members is also their work .
To increase their capital by issuing a debenture .
There is a great variance in the progress of the Land Development Banks in various states of the country .
Special progress has happened in Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra, but progress happened in states like Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa cannot be considered satisfactory .
Unskilled Management - The members and employees of directorate of most banks are untrained and inexperienced .
These banks do not have enough finance .
In almost all banks more than 80% functional capital is obtained from loans .
Adverse effect of land development laws - In some states adverse effect of land development laws is seen on the activities of the Land Development Banks .
In states like Gujarat and Bihar due to the prohibition of land transfer or sale under the tenant act, the working of the Land Development Banks has been hampered .
The process of loan sanctioning adopted by these banks is very complex .
Also long delays happen in unnecessary forms in loan disbursement .
In some states this work gets done in two months or in some states it takes 3-4 months or somewhere upto 9 months .
Due to this the debtor gets very tired and after a time his interest in the bank vanishes .
