What is climate- climate is made up of two words water and air.
In Urdu it is called Abhawa.
` Jal ` or ` Aab ` means water and the meaning of ` Vayu ` or ` Hawa ` is obviously air.
That is to say that the word climate is made from the combination of air and water.
Water here refers to rains and the air refers to the air that affects the environment surrounding us.
Sometimes it generates moisture around us and sometimes it generates heat.
Rain also does somewhat a similar work.
This concludes that climate is an object that gives us heat and cool.
We experience both of them ourselves.
But there are such changes also which we experience on our own.
And there are some changes which we do not feel.
All such things are called climate.
Thus the combined impact of the heat, cold, moisture and rains of any place is called climate.
There is an integral relationship between climate and agriculture.
The success and failure of crops depend on this.
Sudden change in climate sometimes leads to great loss in agriculture.
There is a terror of plants getting affected by diseases if the weather during winters remain cloudy continuously for 3-4 days.
It mostly catches Gerui disease, consequently the growth of plant retards.
Extremely cold weather and sudden rainfall destroys crop.
This is to say that climate affects agriculture right from the plowing , sowing , weeding , irrigation , harvesting till the time it reaches home.
Hence it is essential for a successful farmer to begin his work after identifying the climate.
If there are no clouds in the sky then the plants start turning yellow and finally dry.
The crops can tolerate a fixed amount of moisture.
If this moisture suddenly stops and there is no amount of water in the plants then they stop food formation process.
The roots become dry, break and the crop gets destroyed.
The crop growth also stops when the moisture content is more.
The downfall in temperature affects the plant leaves more.
Their veins stop working.
The crops are sown according to the seasons.
Climatic knowledge during those seasons is essential.
There are 6 seasons.
Each of them lasts for two months.
Our year begins from Chaitra, when winter is on the verge of ending and summer begins.
These seasons can be easily identified in the plains of our country.
But there are some parts of this country which are extremely chilly for eight months and some are hot for eight months.
Some have year round rainfall up to 500 inches and places like Rajputana do not even have 5 inches average rainfall.
Our country is very large, tropic of cancer passes through it, it has ocean on three sides and it falls on the way of monsoon winds.
Hence the climate here varies at different places.
The reason is that slanting Sun rays fall on tropic of Cancer.
The Sun shines overhead for four months a year.
It increases the heat during these days but when the Sun enters tropic of Capricorn, the heat impact becomes very less and the weather becomes cool.
The place which will be more close to tropical line will be more hot and less cold and will get heavy rainfall.
But as we go away from the tropical line the situation will be opposite.
That is to say the climate will be more cold , less hot with average rainfall.
And even if we reach the poles there will be year round cold, and sometimes snowfall will also occur.
The Sun will be rarely visible.
If the place falls on the way of monsoon winds then rainfall is possible there but if it doesn ` t fall there then the place becomes barren and deserted.
Rajputana neither falls on the monsoon arising from Bay of Bengal nor Arabian Sea.
Consequently it remains dry.
Similar climate in plains is essential.
Our country is situated between 8 degree and 30 degree northern latitude.
From this point of view our climate should be warm but this is not the situation.
The reason is the soil structure of this place.
Because of different structure of soil, the climate of different places is different.
Yes, the climatic conditions of plains is definitely similar.
If the crops get adequate water on appropriate time then the production is good.
But generally it is seen that there is always a fury of rains all the times in the form of heavy rainfall, less rainfall and untimely rainfall.
It damages a lot of crop.
These three things are harmful for agriculture.
During rainy season due to heavy rainfall the crop get washed away or become rotten.
sometimes it becomes difficult to resolve the problem of seeds.
The fury of drought is all the more dreadful.
The leaves generally get affected by chilly weather and it stops the internal action of leaves.
Because of this the leaves cannot make their food and gradually start drying.
Because of extreme chilly weather the crops sometimes bear big losses.
With the help of thermometer temperature calculator we can ascertain chilly weather while before and protect the crops using appropriate measures.
If the crops are irrigated before the arrival of winters then the crops remain unaffected.
Its impact can be forbidden up to a certain extent by ejecting smoke around the farm during winters.
Rain Gauge - It is a hollow instrument.
It has a cone from where rain water enters.
This cone is attached to a glass bottle.
Water gets collected in the bottle through the cone.
The water of the glass is measured with a measuring device.
This instrument is kept in an open place during rainfall so the atmospheric rain directly enters into it.
The water should at least be measured once in every 24 hour.
Such rains are measured in inches.
For example if there 2 inches of water in a measuring glass then the rainfall that day will be called 2 inches only.
Sometimes rainfall occurs at the end of February or first week of March.
It leads to the rotting of collected grains in farms.
The seeds catches a kind of black spot which reduces its rate in market and the taste also becomes bitter.
Thus grains are greatly affected by rains until they reach home.
When there are sudden rains at the end of May after Rabi harvesting they adequately help in summer plowing.
Hence it is clear that rain division is more significant for cultivation than the amount of rainfall.
Untimely rains puts bad impact on crops and sometimes lead to scarcity but timely rains can make the farmers rich.
Firstly all the insects originate in the form of eggs by their parent insect.
Different insects have different kinds of eggs.
These eggs are round, long, triangular etc.
Some eggs are yellow and some are white.
This is to say that eggs have several forms and colors.
Consequently every egg gives rise to long , with many joints , crawling living being which is called kirauna , bhudila , ilat or sunda.
The time of egg hatching is also different.
But it is essential to know that eggs hatch quickly in summers.
Egg hatching delays with increasing cold.
Eggs do not eat nor drink anything but the ` insects that comes out start running here and there in search of food.
These insects eat the soft stem propagation , leaves and fruits when they get time.
You know ` bhalu sunde ` .
It eats the leaves of pigeon pea, kidney bean and urad.
The green insect which is found on the leaves of pumpkin, gourd and nenua eats its leaves.
You will be amazed to know that very soon these insects destroy the entire crop.
That is why the form `` Sunda `` of insects is very furious.
These insects are responsible for destroying your crops.
The gram insects eat the stems of growing plants and destroy the entire crop overnight.
Every insect adds to the generation growth after copulation.
Majority of the male insects die after copulation.
The female insects also face the similar situation.
Majority of the the female insects die because of laying innumerable eggs.
But as opposite to this , queen termite about whom you will learn later lives for 7-8 years giving 70000-80000 eggs everyday.
The entire world is aware of termite insect.
It is prevalent in entire world as compared to other regional insects.
The origin of this insect is also very old.
There is a story of a termite catching a sage ` s body in an Indian religious book.
Thus on this basis the age of the insects and the harmful effects that they could have done can be estimated.
Various remedies to curb them are being considered everywhere in the world.
Their attack is seen more on the objects made from wood, chevron, bamboo etc.
There are four kinds of termites in a single burrow.
The termites that destroy the things are called labor termites.
Every labor termite is 1/4th inches tall and light yellow-golden in color.
Eating things and making burrows in soil, collecting soil and building houses outside ground and carrying new egg termites from one place to another is the job of these labor termites.
9-10 millions of termites stay in every burrow and there is a place which is called state home.
The king and queen termite stay in this state home.
The queen termite keeps the new eggs in an orchard near labor termite state home.
This orchard is the growth place for eggs.
It has fungal growth and which is eaten by the new termites coming out of the eggs.
The state home and orchard also has some protecting termites whose work is to protect.
Only seven kinds of tiddi insects in the world have been known so far.
Amongst them India alone has three kinds of tiddis.
These tiddis are not only found in India but also in middle east and central Africa.
The most devastating of these three of tiddis is the one which is called desert tiddi.
In English this insect is called Shistosarka-grigeria.
In India these tiddis are found in the desert of Sindh and Rajasthan.
Outside India they develop and grow in Balochistan etc. also.
The eggs of tiddis are very small yellow and brown in color like rice.
During summers these eggs hatch within 12-14 days.
But during winters they take at least 25-26 days in hatching.
Our government has made many arrangements considering tiddis attack as national difficulty.
An institution has been opened under the supervision of every district officer whose officers keep a complete information about tiddis attack.
Thus the information regarding the tiddis attack should be provided to the nearby government officer.
The action should be quickly taken after the information.
These officers will follow the remedies which I have told you before.
But this does not mean that all the works will be done by the government officers.
You should help them while using every possible remedy.
We believe that controlling tiddi attack is a government affair but all the people of the village should give physical, psychological and monetary help.
Arrange for 10 ser water , 25 ser paddy straw, sodium silicate and 3 ser jaggery.
Now mix a little water into it and make a solution.
Knead the entire hay with this jaggery juice.
Mix ` sodium flausilicate ` in this kneaded thing.
The mixture thus prepared should be neither too dry nor tough or loose.
Then this mixture should be put very early morning into the farm.
This experiment kills majority of the insects.
12-14 ser mixture is adequate for bigha land.
Sodium flausilicate with a moon trademark can be bought from shops selling manure.
Sodium flousilicate is a poison.
Hence it should be used carefully.
Like sugarcane insects(sunda) another insect(sunda)attacks millet, maize and sorghum.
It is also called Kunsaa.
This insect(sunda) always reaches wherever maize, millet and sorghum is grown in India.
There is no dearth of these insects outside India in Korea, Japan and Shyam and Brahma.
After reaching the plants these insects(sundas) first eat the leaves and then when they get some energy , they make holes in the stems and enter into them.
Because of their destructive attack , the transfer of nutrients from the soil to the plants and its distribution in all the parts stop.
As a result plant growth retards.
After getting entire food, the insects(sundas) become more powerful in 15-25 days.
They are around one inch long and yellowish brown in color.
Their head is black and there are four stripes on the body from front to back.
The insect(sunda) is fully mature in this stage.
Thus after getting entire food the insects(sundas)turn into pupa inside the same dead center.
The sunda of this insect is a harmful organism for tobacco.
Their attack is very intense and destructive.
Sometimes it seems as if a large number of these insects(sundas) have surrounded plants.
Apart from tobacco these insects (sundas) attack pigeon pea, cauliflower, potatoes, maize and sweet potatoes.
But amongst all these, the intensity of attack of these insects(sundas) is the most on tobacco.
That is why this sunda is called tobacco sunda(insect).
The same sundas(insects) attack andi or rendi plants.
Tobacco sundas(insects) are around 1.5 inches long and brownish red in colour.
Their head portion is black in color.
It walks during night.
After eating , the healthy sunda(insect) crawls from the plant and falls on to the ground and spends 2-3 weeks at some place there by turning into pupa.
This duration can increase during winters.
Hence pupa form can last for around a month.
Pupa cover ruptures and a insect which is like its ancestors in structure and color, comes out of it.
Some time later the insect also starts contributing in offspring growth.
There are several measures of protecting paddy from perfumed insects.
When the paddy gets fluid in the villages then farmer enters the farm and shakes the paddy plants from both his hands.
This process is known as mangiyana.
Mangiyana word is made up of mang.
The way the hairs are turned on either side for setting hair, likewise the paddy plants are also turned on either sides in farm.
The farmers believe that insect enemies come out with this action and it actually happens.
But this success is momentary.
These insects might go out for sometime but they come back to the field.
Hence `` Mangiyana `` is not a successful measure.
Like the insect (sunda) of sorghum, millet and sugarcane there is a sunda(insect) that attacks paddy and it eats the inner middle portion of the stem.
As a result of this attack , ' dead centers ' originate.
When these sundas(insects) simply attack baby plants they become dry and fall of ground but if the mature plants are attacked then they bear weak flowers and seeds.
The fibers turn white in color.
This insect is a destructive enemy for entire paddy producing region of Asia.
You will be amazed to know that due to the destructive attack of this insect, India alone has to bear a loss of 1 billion every year because they are found in all the paddy growing regions of India.
They are found in abundance in south India.
They reach the lower portion of the stem and eat the inside element by making holes in it.
Consequently the insects(sundas) climb up the stem and also become powerful.
They get the entire food in 15-16 days itself.
During this stage they make light yellow holes to come out but they do not come out at this point of time.
The sundas (insects) close these hole through the small particles inside stem.
Buy calcium arsenate from the market and mix ash or lime into it and sprinkle them on the paddy plants before sunset.
Because of this experiment the sundas(insects) that come out at night will begin to die as will touch the plants.
While doing this experiment one should be careful that there are no possibilities of storms and rains for 10-12 hours otherwise both hard work and cost incurred will be wasted.
The organs of Pyrilla insect(A) is like hay and its length is 3/4 inches.
Its mouth has vessels and both the wings are on the other side of the body and bent like roof.
The new born insects are somewhat different from adult insects.
Because the back portion of its body has two tails.
New born and adult insects suck leaf juice from their needle like mouth.
sugarcane crops are harvested from January till March.
Thus these insects jump and enter the wheat, millet etc. or weeds and other grasses in order to eat their food.
These plants usually lasts till March and April.
As these grasses start drying, the sowing of sugarcane begins.
These insects jump on the newer leaves as the new sugarcane grows.
Thus they work round the year.
These insects attack broad and juicy leaves.
Hence their attack is more successful on the sugarcane whose leaves are broad and juicy.
White fly is one of the great sugarcane destroying insect.
Like pyrilla this insect also attacks sugarcane leaves.
Because of a needle like mouth these insects keep sucking the juice of sugarcane leaves.
As a result of their attack the leaves become weak.
Because of the leaves becoming weak the other organs of the plant cannot function properly.
Hence the juice also reduces.
The juice which is left also becomes tasteless.
Their harmful attack is seen in almost all the sugarcane producing regions of India.
The insects are called by different names in different regions.
In Uttar Pradesh it is called Lahi, white machi in some parts of Bihar and Lahi in many other regions also.
In Gujarat it is called Papti.
Manhu insect is also called Lahi.
Apart from mustard Manhu attacks cauliflower, radish, cabbage and turnip. Every Manhu insect is light yellow in color and 1/2 or 1/10 inches in length.
There are two horn like tubes on the upper back portion of the body of this insect.
This is the peculiar identification of this insect.
Its mouth is build in such a way not to cut and eat but to suck the plant juice.
Thus it remains attached to the mouth of the plant and peacefully sucks the juice.
It looks simple but it very dangerous when it attacks.
The people who resemble this nature is called Manhu.
Manhu insects are both with and without wings.
Apart from the stem cutting sundas of gram there is an insect which enters the gram twigs and attacks growing gram.
They are called simple gram insect (sunda).
It is not only popular for its destructive attack in India but in entire world.
Apart from gram they attack tomatoes, tobacco and maize etc. in favorable conditions.
It becomes cotton insect(sunda) in America and causes loss worth around 120 million dollar.
The mature sunda is 2 inches long and greenish-brown in color.
Further there are some incomplete stripes on its body from front to back.
The insects that harm pea leaves are generally in the form of flies.
But yes, there length and breath is less than simple fly.
These insects are seen flying in pea farms during January-February.
After copulation, the female insects lay 300-400 eggs in its leaves by making holes.
These eggs hatch in 7-8 days.
The Sundas that come out on its hatching are very dangerous because these sundas(insects) eat the upper portion of the leaves for their food.
As a result of this process white brown lines are build on entire leaves.
Consequently the leaves start drying and the growth of plants stops.
It bears less fruits and the impact is seen on production.
There is a insect like butterfly whose width along with wings is half inches and the color is brown.
There are brown color patches on its wings which are more on the joints of other wing.
This insect comes out only during night and gets attracted towards light but hides itself and spends time during day.
These insects are seen flying before rains and even before that during May-June.
During this stage these insects do not harm the crop themselves.
These insects lay eggs on soft leaves, new stems, buds and flowers during favorable environment.
These eggs hatch within 8-10 days.
The sundas(insects)that come out on its hatching are quite destructive.
The other sundas(insects) that harm cotton flower and fibers are called patchy sunda(insects) or cotton sunda.
This sunda is a great destructive enemy of cotton.
Like sundas they begin the attack on new stems, leaves and maturing cotton fruits.
In India it leads to the loss of 25-45 % cotton every year.
It wastes several billion Indian rupees.
This insect not only attacks cotton but other plants of cotton species also such as lady ` s finger etc.
The fury of this sunda(insect) is more in middle India, south India and Uttar Pradesh.
The third enemy of cotton is the sunda(insect) which attacks the leaves and eat and curl the green element.
The growth of the plants gets affected by their attack.
Thus the production decreases.
This sunda is also called leaf breaking sunda(insect).
This sunda is 1.25 inches long and grey in color.
Every red insect is 0.75 inches long.
Their legs and mouth are long, and the mouth sucks juice.
The long mouth of the insect sticks to its stomach when it takes rest.
The head and some part of the back portion of this insect is dark black in color.
The wings are not so red but somewhat orangish yellow in color.
The lower portion of the other half of the wings are somewhat black.
There is also a black patch on the other wings.
Jasid insect is one of the harmful cotton insects.
It becomes green during rainy season but somewhat reddish yellow in winters.
Both the wings hang on both the sides of the body like a slope.
There is a black spot on every front wing.
Apart from the adult jasid insects their wingless new born insects also suck the juice on the lower surface of the cotton leaves.
These new born insects are always green or light green and shiny.
Apart from cotton these insects attack lady ` s finger , potatoes and brinjal.
The leaves become dry because of their attack, hence the plants become weak.
That is why plants are unable to bear more fruits and flowers.
The adult black insects are seen more during July-November.
Every adult insect is somewhat bigger than common house fly.
The black insect is more long than wide.
The head is brownish black, the wings are brown and the other parts of the body like back etc, are golden yellow in color.
The insect is also called Jhanjha.
The insect is seen more in north India.
Like black insect, Jhanjha insect also harms radish, cabbage, cauliflower and mustard plants etc.
The structure of the mouth of this insect is peculiar.
This insect does not cut and eat the leaves but sucks the green element of leaves through its sharp sucking mouth.
The plants lack the power of building food because of absence of green element, as a result the leaves become dry and turn yellow.
Hence the plant growth retards.
The Jhanjha insects are seen more during October till March.
In favorable conditions after copulation, the Jhanjha female insect separately lays eggs on the leaves of above mentioned plant.
The female insect dies after laying eggs.
The eggs hatch in 6-8 days.
On hatching the eggs produce the new born jhanjhas that resemble their ancestors.
These jhanjha babies attack the leaves and keep sucking their juice.
Sometimes they are seen in groups on a branch or leaves.
Small jhanjha kids attain maturity in 20-25 or 30 days and engage in offspring growth through copulation process.
As a result 4-5 generations are produced in a year.
Majority of the brinjal is produced in our country during October-February as per the weather.
Apart from the taste of consumers the farmers who grow them also get economic benefits.
To speak the truth, the farmers do not get satisfying benefits because the brinjal plants catches several kinds of insects and destroys it.
Some of the insects attack brinjal, fruits, some attack its stem and there are some which attack its leaves.
The insects that destroy brinjal enter in the frontal portion of brinjal and eat the inner stem portion thereby making it worthless.
As a result the frontal part becomes loose.
If you see that you will get a hole and excreta of an insect along with that at some place.
If the hole is big one should assume that the insect has left the place after eating.
Therefore you should cut and burn 4-5 inches part down from that hole.
If you do not do it then almost some part of all the plants will become loose and the crop will die.
Potato is one of the major vegetables.
Like wheat and barley potatoes also contain more of starch.
That is why potatoes keep a special place in our everyday meal along with other edible items.
Its use everyday saves more grains.
Thus during this crisis period of grains, essential edible item like potatoes should be saved from the attack of external diseases and insects.
A great amount of potatoes get rotten every year not only in India but at other places of the world also.
Because of this humans have to face a big economic and food related loss.
This destructive potato insect in thin but 0.5-0.75 inches in length, somewhat whitish Yellow and brown in color.
The other pair of the wings are different from the former wings.
The other wings are dark and the former wings are light in color.
There are hairs on the edges of former wings.
After attaining maturity the female insect does copulation and lays 70-80 eggs somewhat long and brown in color on the the potatoes kept in granaries.
The eggs are scattered.
The sundas that come out after egg hatching roam here and there to destroy the potatoes and make holes in the potatoes and satisfy there hunger.
This process makes underpass in potatoes which leads to other diseases in potatoes.
The potatoes get destroyed after rotting.
They start giving bad odour.
We clean the sacks or barn when rice or wheat gets infected by woodworm.
You also know that these grains gets infected by a insect that is called weevil or woodworm.
A similar kind of worm harms sweet potatoes also.
The length of this insect in 1/3 inches and it is blue and black in color.
The mouth portion of this insect is long which is called thuthun.
By seeing the Hindu Arsha epics of ancient history we get to know that paddy was cultivated in this country since its creation and the grains were not brought from other countries and sown here.
The beginner place of its production is this country only.
The foreigners have taken it from this country and propagated at their place.
It was fertile before cultivation began as it grows even today near ponds with the names phasai and vattini and since it is automatically fertile it is called Palhar. This proves that human life must have been dependent only on flesh and fruits, forest, wild fruits etc. and paddy must have been used for food during that time.
It is considered so pious amongst Hindus that during all the Pujas in temples and all the auspicious occasions rice is used as `` Akshat `` .
The `` body donation `` ritual during agnihotra, shradh and tarpan involves its use.
Apart from India paddy is grown in abundance in China, Japan, Kashmir, Afghanistan, Burma etc. countries and they are also consumed more as compared to other food grains in these countries.
The area under paddy cultivation in our country is around five billion acre which means 1/4th of all the area covered under cultivation is paddy.
If we calculate wheat then it is grown in around 2.5 billion acre land in the entire country which is the double of paddy.
Though the major meal of humans in entire West Bengal, Bihar, Burma, and south India is rice.
According to Darwin the food grain which is grown in abundance gets the opportunity to spread in that expanded area only.
And the varieties are also that many.
Therefore different paddys are identified on the basis of species, qualities, process and productiveness.
Most of them are identified on the basis of color, aroma, size and qualities.
For example take Varahi kamch and vyaghri. Varahi fruit(ratatalu) is roughly the size of a varah( pig). vyaghri(rusah)- the flowers of these trees after flowering look like teeth of light.
Similarly paddy species also have names.
They are basmati, bhantaphul, phulpiyasa,ranikajar, kanak jeera,shyamamghata, badshah pasand and hansraj etc.
Some of these species are described.
Bhantaphul is blue in color.
The plants are 3-4 feet long.
They are called bhantaphhol because they have aroma and color like brinjal flowers.
They grow in abundance in loamy soil.
Old cow dung manure is beneficial for this .
It needs less irrigation as compared to other paddys and their crop takes 2-3 weeks more time than other crops.
Its rice is used to make Pulao. It has royal qualities.
There are less breakage when the rice is processed using machines , the quality of the rice increases with its age and a one year old rice becomes more aromatic and tasty.
Its aroma spreads till far away the farm during maturing. The rate of the rice could be 8-12 rupees/quintal.
15 seeds are put in one acre of farm.
Many people say that they only are kanakjeera and ganikajar but according to me they are the names of some other variety of rice which do not grow in this region. If we see the meaning of their names then, kanak means something resembles the color dhatura seeds and kanak means they should look like gold and that is why they are called kanakjeera. And the meaning of ranikajar is also the same.
Their thin stripes like kajal in the eyes of a queen and paddy with black stripes, these symptoms do not resemble bhanta flower. Ramkajra should also be understood in a similar way that there is a thick kunari paddy which contains thick black stripes.
Shyamghata- This paddy is more black than other paddys.
The mature plants of the farm look like clouds and that is why they are called Shyamghata.
The plant is 2-2.5 hand long that it is 3-4 feet long.
When the rains are over and some clouds are left then its greenery looks very attractive and beautiful.
The rice is soft and small which breaks on beating.
Therefore it is not fit for making pulao and becomes quite white when become older.
When we think what is the prime time to sow paddy then time difference also occurs because of their varieties. For example kuanri paddy is sown during the beginning of rains on 2nd June.
Katiki paddy is sown in Ashadh(June) and harvested in the month of Katik (October).
Such as Basmati and Amghod.
The sowing of Aghani paddy also begin with the arrivals of rains, they are sown in Ashadh and again its saplings are planted during July and August when the farm is flooded with water and the crop becomes mature during Agahn(November).
Bhantaful and Hiranjan are cultivated here.
There are sown in June(Ashadh) as the rains begin and harvested in the month of savan and bhado.
A variety of Jethi paddy is also found which is found in abundance near the areas of Balia district.
They are called Jaisariya. The seeds of of this paddy are sprinkled in the month of Fagun(March and February)
They are considered pious by the Hindus used like fruits and they become mature till the month of Katik. They are called Tinni and Pasai.
If there are so many grasses in the young paddy then they need to be looked for weeds 4-5 times.
There is a grass plant which resembles paddy plant and is called Danwar needs to be put out.
Because the paddy sucks a lot of edible elements from manure and land and becomes more strong than the paddy and makes them weak.
Paddy plants become weak therefore weeds are not put out from Aghani paddy. A grass which is called Narai needs to be put out of some farms, these grasses are mostly found in Aghani and sown paddy.
Gandi or Gandi are very foul smelling flies that is why they are called gandi.
Such as the mosquitoes stuck to the bodies of animals and human and suck their blood, likewise this fly sucks the element from which rice originates.
The plants are not left with a single grain of rice.
Hundreds acres of farm get destroyed because of this insect.
There are no major measures of keeping away these flies.
They burn fire near the farms at night where so several flies come and get burnt.
Agricultural department office has come up with another measure these days where a 12 feet long, 3 feet wide and 84 inch net should be made. A single net carries 30 feet sackcloth.
15 feet long and 1 1/4 wide bag can be built from this sackcloth. The mouth of the bag is open towards length and a 12 feet long stick is attached at the edges of the mouth.
So that the web is stretched,1.5-2 feet long bamboo should be there at the edges because of which the breadth becomes 3 feet(1gaj), because of this flies get caught in the web when they are dragged in the farm and they are brought out alive from the farm and then killed. This work should be done from the morning till 10 pm. It would be proper to take the web in the direction of wind so that the web will remain open due to wind speed and more and more insects would be caught in the web. Many people believe that doing this will shed paddy flowers and then paddy could not be grown.
Eating entire paddy is deadly. They are only useful for external work such as worshiping etc. but when the upper husk is removed using machine or indigenous technique then rice can be used for food in several ways. They are fried and chewed, used for making kheer by boiling in milk, when cooked with pulses they are called khichri and when they are separately cooked they are called bhat. Pulao and many kinds of sweet dishes are also made from them.
They are called Tandul in Sanskrit, Viracch in Persian, Ursasman in Arabic, Karajj in Turani and rozi in Suriani language. In more than half part of India human life is dependent on rice.
No matter whether they are poor or rich everybody eats rice with interest. Older rice are of best quality.
That is why it is a best valuable food.
Greek doctors believe that apart from being tasty rice satisfies hunger, gives obesity to the body, cures intestinal wounds, excessive bleeding, stomach ailments.
They are considered naturally warm(hot)& dry and cold and dry by different people.
Rice warms those with warm nature and cools those with cold nature.
The government has encouraged the organized marketing of agricultural products in the country through the network of regulated markets.
Most of the state governments and Union Territories have made laws for the development agricultural goods market.
7,177 markets have been covered under regulation till March, 2002.
Out of which around 15 % work under regulation sector.
Yet the study says that the establishment of regulated markets have achieved a limited success in providing need based facilities and services in building an able marketing.
There is a lack of required facilities to manage most of the products in regulated markets.
Rural periodic markets generally and tribal markets particularly have remained out of their development area.
Monopoly methods and traditions have stopped the functioning of agricultural marketing through free and competitive trade, use of modern techniques in crop technology and export, agricultural based industries and goods granaries etc.
Enhancing trade competition and providing facilities such as categorization, standardization, storage, financial security ,etc have become subsidiary works.
Efficient agricultural marketing facility is required for the development of agricultural sector.
It is essential to have flexible, quick and inclusive marketing structure to face challenges like increasing production, expansion of new technologies, changing social, economical scenario, size of distribution series and increasing demand to reduce the margin between consumer and farmers, consequences emerged due to liberalization and globalization after the due duration of world trade organizations.
The liberalization of agriculture in world trade have provided opportunities to farm sectors to send their agricultural products in world market.
In order to provide market access to agricultural communities, it is essential that the internal agricultural marketing system in the country is united and strengthened.
Currently only state governments under state agricultural marketing regulation act have been given the right to start the process of establishing regulated agricultural markets.
As a result of the process of establishing markets, the private sector cannot initiate the establishment markets with best facilities.
The role of the government in this sector should be of a facilitator and not of a market manager or controller.
Essential high level labor skill and more and more capital for the basic structure and management of market can only be obtained from private sectors.
The farmers are encouraged to categorize their agricultural product on farm through direct marketing.
Thus they escape the expense on transportation to bring the product from farm to the regulated market for selling.
The farmers and the buyers also invest very little through direct marketing and it yields good amount of money.
Consequently the result of direct marketing expansion of agricultural products in south Korea lead to 20-30 % decrease in consumer ` s price and the producers also received up to 10-20 % more profit.
The warehouse certification in the country should also be started so that along with the amount of product the quality is also certified and these receipts are accepted as the basis for loans.
The loan margin need of agricultural products storage should be reduced.
It is also essential to adopt international level quality management method.
Sorghum has been cultivated in India since ancient times but they were sown for fodder, not for food grain. But now they are sown for food grain also.
Sorghum is cultivated in northern India during Kharif season and during Kharif and rabi both in southern India.
In India it is cultivated at large scale in Rajasthan, Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh.
Not much sorghum is grown in states like West Bengal, Tamil Nadu etc.
As per official figures in India the acreage of this crop is around 1.25 billion acres.
India is third largest in terms of area under sorghum cultivation.
Maharashtra is the biggest sorghum producing state.
Karnataka and Madhya Pradesh occupy second and third position respectively.
Sorghum seeds contain 10.4 % protein, 1.9 % fibers, 1.6% minerals and 72 % carbohydrates.
Sorghum contains 1.4-2.4 % of lycin amino acid protein.
Starch is prepared from a special variety of sorghum.
Liquor is also prepared from its seeds.
It is also a best means of providing alcohol.
Apart from green fodder , silage which is a tasty food for cattle is also prepared from sorghum.
Around 12-15 kgs/acre seeds are sown for fodder.
While the cultivation done for getting grains require 8 kgs/ acre seeds.
The grains start growing till end of October.
Its average production is 2.5-3 tonnes /acre.
Sorghum is a crop of warm climate but fast growing species could also be grown during summers in cold regions.
More than 30 degree Celsius temperature at the time of fiber growth can be harmful for the sorghum crop.
6-8 pH value of a land is considered good for the cultivation of sorghum.
There should be good drainage system in the farm.
The farm should be ploughed using cultivator or tiller and leveler should be run.
CSH-5: This variety gets prepared in 105-110 days.
It prepares 33-35 tonnes /hectare grains and 90-95 tonnes fodder.
The plants are around 175 c.m long.
The corns are long and semi-tied, the size of the grains are small.
CSH-9: This variety gets prepared in 105-110 days.
36-40 tonnes of grains and 95-100 tonnes/ hectare of fodder are prepared.
Jawahar sorghum : This variety gets prepared in 110-115 days.
The grain production is 3032 tonnes/hectare.
They are appropriate for light less deep land and low rainfall areas.
The seeds should be treated with fungicide and thyrum at the rate of 3 g.m per kg seeds.
10 gm agosprilium and PSB. culture should be used at the rate of per kilogram of seeds after treating the seeds with fungicide medicine.
Sorghum is sown in the month of July.
Sowing should be done keeping a gap of 12-15 c.m between the plants and a gap of 45 c.m between the rows.
There should be 15-17 plants in every square meter.
Dry sowing can be done after receiving information regarding rains.
The dense plants should be pulled out and a certain distance should be kept between the plants.
A healthy plant is kept at a distance of 10-12 c.m while doing rarefaction after sprouting when the plants are 8-10 days old.
Rest all the plants are removed.
Later if there are light showers then another plant can be planted at a place where there are no plants.
Irrigation is very essential after putting manure in sorghum field.
The weeds should be removed after 15-20 days of sowing.
Sorghum fields also get hugely attacked by insects. The various kinds of insects that infect them damage the crops.
If the crops are infected by stem penetrating insect then a solution of 10 gm soap should be sprayed thrice at an interval of 10 days.
Maharashtra crops get hugely infected by meez fly.
The insect attacks when the fibers come out.
The female flies are orange or red in color which lays eggs inside the flowers.
Withing 2-3 days membranes come out of the eggs and destroys the flower testes by eating them.
An average of 40-50 tonnes/hectare grains and 100-125 tonnes dry kadbi are received by doing hybrid sorghum cultivation using advanced methods.
It depends on rains.
Roughly 25-30 tonnes/hectare dry kadbi are received from these areas generally.
Small cardamom is grown from India till Malaysia.
Small green cardamom is used to bring aroma to any edible product.
Their seeds are quite aromatic.
The botanical name of green cardamom is elettaria cardamom.
The plant is bushy and the stem extends till 3 meter.
The flowers appear in white bunches.
Cardamom also appears in bunches.
The flower fruits have three covers which contain seeds.
Mix cardamom in black pepper and ghee and consume it to cure sour belching.
Doing this cures sour belching.
Sometimes we get hiccups which lasts for quite long.
People feel uncomfortable in themselves in such situations.
Cardamom should be immediately put in mouth for getting rid of sudden hiccups.
It immediately gives relief.
People are mostly attacked by heat strokes during summers.
During this season cardamom should be kept inside mouth before going out.
It saves from heat strokes.
Even if someone is attacked by heat then the patient should be immediately given cardamom.
It reduces the effect of heat stroke.
Dream disorder- chew cardamom seeds or dissolve it in milk and drink it at night. Doing this cures dream disorder.
This formula is also effective for patients with stone.
There is an ongoing debate over farming.
Agriculture is the means of livelihood of majority of the people in India.
Despite being marginal farmers some of them get good income through agriculture.
Some farmers are getting good yield despite being in infertile areas.
All this becomes true through hard work and strong will power.
One such farmer is Nand kiashore Jaismeria from Jodhpur district.
He has turned the proverb of getting gold from barren land into reality.
In the beginning they cultivated plums adopting integrated system and now they are earning name in other states through plum nurseries.
For this he has received many honors including N. G. Ranga farmer award.
Around 25 k.m to the north of district headquarters(Jodhpur), behind behind sandy hills, Mankalao village is not considered good for cultivation.
Nand kishore Jaisalmeria lives in village surrounded by sand hills from all sides.
The average rainfall in the area is 365 mm.
The farmers consider it better to engage themselves for earning livelihood in other works rather than agriculture.
The scientists examined the farm soil.
After investigation with the initiative of scientists, with advanced systems, Nand kishore planted plums in his farm.
For the first time 750 saplings were planted.
A responsibility of taking care of these plants in sandy soil was undertaken.
He irrigated each and every plant and took care of them.
some time later these plants grew old and flowers appeared on them.
Nand kishore was utterly happy to see this.
He immediately reached Kajri and informed the scientists about the flowering of plants.
The scientists observed the place and gave techniques to save plum flowers.
Consequently innumerable plums were produced in the farm.
In such a situation , neem ,acacia etc. were planted in the farm.
There was double profit from these trees.
Firstly, the farm lines became strong and secondly the trees started providing wood for fuel and fodder permanently after growing old.
This also led to the increase in soil conservation, security and fertility.
Later the woods of these trees also became means of income for them.
Hence cultivation of a single farm, especially selling plums began, the fee was received by giving bee keeping box on rent, wood for fuel was cut from plum and other trees.
Every plum tree started giving 30 kilograms of plums every year.
India is an agriculture dominant country.
Agriculture is the livelihood of around 65-70% population here.
Almost 65% work force is engaged into this and currently(2010-11)agricultural contribution in gross domestic product(GDP)is 14.2 % and the share in export is around 16%.
Its development is not possible without villages.
Wheat, paddy, sugarcane, maize, potatoes, vegetables etc. are major produces here.
The population of the country is ever increasing which was 102.7 billion as per the census of 2001 and is around 121 billion currently while arable land is limited and that is reducing everyday.
Consequently the size of the land holding has reduced to around 0.15 hectare.
Hence in order to increase the food production as per demand, the information regarding advanced agricultural technique is very essential.
The crop experts are fully responsible towards this work.
The agricultural scientists are successfully facing food crisis.
The agricultural crops have been classified into three categories kharif, rabi and zaid as per the seasons.
The major kharif crops are paddy, sorghum, millet, pigeon peas, sesame, groundnut, urad, gram and soybean.
Major Rabi crops are wheat, mustard, gram, peas,lentils and rapeseed.
Seasonal crops such as -kahu, melon, lady ` s finger, cucumber, urad, green gram, cow pea, sunflower etc. can also be grown during Zaid.
Cotton is one of the major fibrous agricultural produce.
They are sown during kharif season and cotton clothes are manufactured from the fibers received from them.
They are primarily grown in black soil, alluvial soil and laterite soil.
The quality of cotton depends of the length, thinness,maturity and uniformity of fibers.
Like other crops it is essential to save cotton also from various diseases(mlani, mul,enthrekanoz and jhulsa) and insects(haral, chitkabri or pink sundi) so as to get good production.
Oats, lusarn, sorghum, gwar, millet, napier grass and para grass are major fodder crops.
Amongst them barsim, napier and para grass are extremely nutritious.
Water puts a great impact on the plant growth and crop production.
Hence the land should have ample moisture.
This water benefits the crop through multiple chemical, physical and biological processes.
The water moisture absorbing capillary gravitation in soil is found in four forms.
The soil manure is quite significant for profitable production.
Manure increases the fertility of land and supplies essential nutritive elements for the growth of plants.
The essential elements that the plants get from them are nitrogen, phosphorous, potash, calcium, magnesium and sulfur.
The source of potassium are also organic matter and chemical fertilizers.
Calcium, magnesium and sulfur are found in many kinds of compound forms.
The amount of nutritive elements required for these crops are different for different crops and the time of supplying them also varies.
The requirement of nitrogen is more during growth but the requirement of phosphorous is more initially.
Plants absorb potassium from the soil till the crop growth.
Potassium is required in great amount in the beginning for the growth of roots.
Cow dung manure is the best of all manures.
They contain all nutritive elements for the plants but majority of the cow dung is used in the form of fuel in our country.
The nutritive elements of the cow dung that gets collected in heap in small amounts decreases due to rains and sun.
Thus in order to properly collect this manure, the manure is collected in a pit which is called compost.
These days there is a tradition of preparing gobar gas using gobar gas plants.
The appropriate amount of water availability is extremely important for good production.
Rain water is the major source.
But it is uncertain and irregular, therefore the lack of water is supplied through artificial means of irrigation.
Atmospheric moisture, temperature, wind speed, land variety, special weeding of crop, style of sowing and ploughing and land fertility determine the amount of water requirement for the crops.
Accumulation of more than required water leads to hindrance in air circulation because of which harmful salts start accumulating, the temperature of soil decreases, roots become loose, ploughing becomes bad and becomes marshy.
Accumulated water gives birth to various diseases and insects.
The quality of under ground water also varies.
At some places the water is fit for agriculture, while at other places it is saline, sticky or poisonous.
Thus such kind of water should be used for irrigation keeping their quality in mind.
Saline water contains more of NO3.
Such water can be of both the varieties saline and sweet.
Saline water is harmful for agriculture but sweet water is not.
It is essential to have knowledge about various qualities of crops so as to get more profit and good production.
Advanced varieties have special qualities of giving more production and as a result of their combined contribution, the per unit area agricultural production can be achieved.
Short day plants- If the amount of sun rays during the day is more than the set duration then the botanical growth is more and the plants do not flower.
For example if the maximum time limit is 8 hours then the time period for sun rays should be 8 hours of less than that.
The major kharif crops in this section consist of maize, soybean, sorghum, millet, paddy etc.
They are called C4 plants.
Day neutral plants: The flowering process of plants of this section are not affected by the duration of light.
The flowering happens in both scanty and long sun rays duration such as cotton, sun flower, tomatoes etc.
Cash crops- Which are immediately or directly sold in the market to earn profit such as sugarcane or potatoes, tobacco.
Padology-It is that branch of soil science which considers soil to be purely natural object and the experimental usefulness is not taken care of.
This science is related to the origin and distribution of soil which is known in the study of soil organization, life and mobility.
This science studies the quality, classification, behavior, anatomy and body composition of the soil, it also includes the description of natural powers responsibility of soil preparation.
On the basis of soil examination, the availability of essential nutritive elements in the farm soil can be determined and on the basis of available examination results balanced fertilizer recommendations for the crops are made.
Hence soil examination is extremely important for advanced agriculture.
Fruits and vegetables have special significance in human diet.
His everyday food should essentially include fruits and vegetables because they provide him with vitamin, carbohydrates, salts, iron, calcium and phosphorous which are essential for balanced diet.
Other than food fruits and vegetables are also significant from economic point of view.
Fruit cultivation is more profitable than food grain.
Developed countries also do international trade of fruits.
Further, industries have been set up to make jam,jelly, squash, vinegar, juice, sauce etc. from fruits which are the means of livelihood of many people.
Several kinds of fruits should not be planted together in the orchard but separately.
While making plantation plan one should make sure that various kinds of trees develop properly, it facilitates agricultural work and more and more fruits are planted.
The various popular methods of tree plantation are square size, rectangular, six sided, quinkans and contour.
The growth of trees are also affected by temperature, air, and chilly weather.
Excess heat and fast wind are harmful for them.
Temporary shade from hay or grass is build to protect the plants from scorching heat.
It is essential to plant wind blocking trees surrounding the orchard to protect them strong wind.
The process of making vegetable and fruit plants able to face the chilly weather, hot wind and scorching heat is the process of making them tolerant.
For this it is essential to do minimum irrigation before it dries and they should be left more and more open.
The scarcity of temperature also makes the plants tolerant.
The process of planting the live plant from one place to another is called transplantation.
It is appropriate to do transplantation when the plants are sleeping or are more actively grown.
Transplantation is done to save expensive seeds.
The plants develop roots with many small branches due to trimming of roots because of transplantation and the time between its plantation and growth is saved. Because of this it has become possible to grow the crops even in adverse conditions.
The transplantation should be carefully carried.
After pulling out the plant they should be kept in a shady place and covered with a wet cloth.
Mango is an extremely important fruit because of its peculiar taste and various uses.
There is great demand for them outside India in foreign countries.
They are grown in all the parts of the country. The various varieties are Dashhari, Safeda, langda, bambaiya, banglauri, neelam etc.
Banana is also a significant Indian fruit.
It is a warm tropical region fruit and apart from India they are hugely grown in Malaya, United States of America, Canada, France, Germany and England.
Hot and humid climate is appropriate for them.
Fruits such as guava, black berry, papaya, litchi etc. have special significance in our country.
The cattle rearing and veterinary science branch of biological science includes getting information regarding animal care, methods of getting more amount of milk from them and poultry farming,fish rearing and honey bee industry.
Further biological science is also helpful in agriculture.
With this the farmers get information about the harmful insects and become more successful in destroying their eggs.
With this he gets knowledge about his friend organisms such as earthworms, frogs, snakes and birds.
The knowledge of living science helps in many industries also.
There is great significance for `` agricultural insect science `` (Agricultural Entomology)since or country is agricultural dominant.
Generally all the crops get affected by insects, which consequently leads to great loss and sometimes the entire crop gets damaged.
Grasshopper, termite, pyrila, chempa, gandhi, fruit and stem borer are some known insects.
The axis of the plant is the ascending part or stem which is towards the light at the upper side.
It bears leaves, buds, branches, flowers and fruits.
The major work of the leaves is to maintain photosynthesis, respiration, vaporization and biological action.
Earthworms are mostly found in humid soil.
Aristotle was the first person to record information regarding animals.
Asinger and storer have also adopted this classification.
Male and female frogs are different.
The heart of frog is broad from front and pointed from behind.
The major work of kidney is to separate harmful elements such as urea, uric acid in the form of urine.
The wings of pigeon are of three kinds- contour, down and rome.
Rabbit is a coward but clever animal.
Cestode is an organism found in the food placenta of humans.
Thiofrustis was the student of Aristotle and he had recorded the information of plants.
the roots of sweet potatoes are somewhere thin and somewhere thick. They are known as tuberous roots.
some flowers are unisexual, some are bisexual, some are feminine, masculine and some are neuter gender.
Tissue system are of three kinds- epidermis, death and convection.
Kahu, Petha, bitter gourd, gourd, cucumber etc. fall into the category of some plants of kukurbita.
The primary tissue of the biennial plants changes as their body becomes bulky and the secondary convection tissue arises which fulfills the need of their grown body.
Breathing process takes place in the chondriosomes present in the living cells.
The flowers of this family are of various colors.
The moss is called funeria.
Agriculture machinery are chiefly classified in two sections.
The first section consists of those machinery which are run by farmers physical power such as khurpi, phawda the second section consists of those machinery which require animals, diesel engine or tractor power to run such as plow, harrow, cultivator.
The machinery named cultivator is used to make the soil soft.
It is useful in destroying weeds, mixing manure to the field and preparing the field for sowing.
The major varieties are Kanpur, Vahvah, shabas etc.
Another useful machinery is harrow.
Like cultivator, harrow also pulls out weeds from the tilled field, makes the soil soft and is helpful in plucking the tough land of the sown field.
Field plowing has special significance in agricultural methods.
Plowing is done from outside to inside or from inside to outside in the field.
Transmission of power is the process of sending power to any engine or electric motor etc. to the source that runs it.
Easily accessible conventional tracks are used to run farm machines.
The tracks are made of strong and flexible element and are put on two and more dhirnis.
They are made from rubber, leather or cotton and are strong.
The farmers of our country generally cut the crops using hand cutters.
The need for advanced equipment for agriculture is ever increasing along with industrial development.
Hence for harvesting the use of reaper and combine harvester at the place of darate is increasing which can be pull from both bullocks and tractors.
The next job after crop harvesting is of `` Lank ki Madai `` in the field.
It is extremely important to use agricultural equipment in order to increase agricultural production.
These agricultural equipment are run through two kinds of energy.
These days paddy is sown using `` zero till `` machine which does good work at low cost.
Chilled cast iron is more tough as compared to other kinds of iron and the iron layers made from them are naturally sharp due to upper friction.
Domestic plow makes a kund of ` V ` size which leaves land between two kunds and in order to plow them line plowing becomes essential.
An equipment named Bakkhar is also popular in Bhognipur tehsil of Kanpur district apart from Bundelkhand.
It is a second land finishing equipment.
Patela is also known as Pata, Suhaga, Sarawan or Haenga.
Dhenkli is one of the ancient method of pulling out water from wells, ponds and canals. It is used at such places where it is not possible to put any stable equipment.
All the processes carried with an objective to prepare land for sowing and making the land weed free and loose during crop growth is known as land finishing.
Indigenous plow is a multipurpose equipment for Indian farmers.
Guniya is a useful equipment to make signs on wood.
Basula is a major equipment of rural carpenter which is used by him in daily works.
Six kinds of retis, flat, semi circular, triangular, round and hand are used.
The work of Jambur is to pull out the nail from the wood.
Ari is an equipment to cut wood.
The use of Nihai is extremely important to beat the iron successfully.
Parallel lines are made when the chisel is kept diagonally.It weakens the lines and a fear of water water seepage near the chisel exists.
Agricultural economy emerged in the form of economic branch which studies the economic processes and economic policies of farmer community.
Hence agricultural economic science is an aspect of economic science and secondly it is a special branch of agricultural science.
Agricultural science is that science which uses economic theories and methods in special conditions of agricultural industry.
These means can be used in various ways to fulfill many kinds of requirements and achieving various objectives.
India was previously a lagging country in agricultural production.
The major reasons are- small holdings, sub division of holdings, dependence on monsoon, epidemic of floods and famine, inappropriate and conventional agricultural methods, illiteracy of farmers, poverty etc.
Many remedies have been done and are being done by the government after independence.
Which has increased agricultural production.
The government is running various educational programs to remove illiteracy.
There are various kinds of geographical and economic conditions in various parts of the country.
Hence a similar kind of educational method is not prevalent in the entire country.
Various kids of educational methods as per the regional situation are being adopted such as -rainy agriculture, humid agriculture, irrigated agriculture, dry agriculture and jhooming agricultural method.
An organ of agricultural economy in India is agricultural labor.
They are those people who work on other people ` s land and get a part of crop or money for their services.
They have no right to take any decision related to the land or the crops grown on the land.
Their number in India is ever increasing.
Zamindari System- Under this a single person is the master of the land of one or more villages and he is called the zamindar.
He is in charge of getting land tax from the farmers and submit them in the royal treasure.
The British rulers gave the authority of the land to some British followers and made a sacrifice of the interest of billions of farmers who plowed the field because of which they had to be dependent on the mercy of Zamindars.
Zamindari system was also abolished through the regulations passed in states like Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh etc.
Only then the creative work of agriculture began.
controlled markets have been established with the objective to improve the condition of agricultural produce marketing.
The buyers and sellers of the committees of these markets are given full representation and their organization and functioning is done as per the rules framed under the rules of the act.
animals have been significant in human life since ancient times.
According to the Livestock Census 2008 the total number of animal and hen was 648 million.
Despite more than 112.5 ml tonne milk production in the year 2009-10, we are lagging behind in production.
From the scientific point of view every human should at least get 280 m.l. milk everyday but the average availability of milk production in our country is 263 gm/day(2009-10), while the world average is 284 gms.
Switzerland, Denmark, America and New Zealand etc. are far ahead from our country from this point of view.
The milk production in the country during 1950-51 was 17 m.l. tonne.
animal rearing is that branch of behavioral science which tells about the art of economically keeping the animals fit.
Under this we study subjects like animal reproduction, animal nutrition, animal management, health etc.
Around 31 % part of the total annual income of our country is received through animal wealth.
The total G.D.P. contribution of animal wealth and fisheries in the year 2008-09 was 4.07%.
We get useful products such as milk, flesh, wool, eggs, leather, manure, hair etc. from animals.
animals are used in agricultural works such as plowing, irrigation and loading goods.
Under various five year plans in the country consistent efforts are being made to improve animal breed, growth in milk production, flesh, wool and eggs.
Research workshops are being held at many places in the country and after the testing beneficial facts are being told to those who rear animals.
The Central government established National Dairy Research Institute, NDRI in Karnal(Harnal) in 1955. This institutions makes discoveries of new information in the field of cattle rearing and milk production and spreads them to the farmers via telecasting.
It has been estimated that the average annual milk production is 178 kilogram per cow and 491 kilogram per buffalo.
Despite the decreasing number of buffaloes in the country their usefulness is more.
50-55% of the milk production in the country is received through buffaloes only but the area of cow reform through breeding is more expansive as compared to buffaloes.
the cows of other section fulfill dual objectives which implies that they give good amount of milk as well as their bulls are good for agricultural work.Its varieties are Haryana, kokrez, tharparkar(safed sindhi), kosi or mewati. angol, gowlao, nimadi, gangatiri or shahabadi and krishna ghati etc.
The third category of cows have been put in Draught category.
The bulls of this category are gamous for agricultural works and fast walk but the cows give very less milk. Amrit mahal, nagauri, pawar, hisar, kherigadh, alambadi, rath, bachaur, bargur, dangi kangayam, khilari, malwi etc. are some of the major varieties.
It is well known that the milk production of foreign breed of cows is much more than the cows of our country.
The major domestic breeds of cows are hybrid frigian, brown swiss, red den, aayar shayar garnsi red pole and short horn.
The hybrid variety of cows made pregnant from them give more milk.
The major hybrid variety of cows are Jarsindh, karan swiss and karan fry.
The milk production of hybrid cows is obviously more and they also become mature soon and start giving milk as compared to domestic cows.
The major objective of sheep rearing is to get wool.
Apart from wool, the country earns 28 billion every year through the flesh, milk, leather and and dung of sheep.
Our country gets an average of 675 grams wool every year from sheep.
Indian sheep have been primarily divided into two sections.
The first category consists of sheep with wool and the second category consists of sheep with hair.
There are two major breeds of sheep with hair, mandila and nellore. These sheep have less of wool and more of hairs.
The sheep and goats generally get ready to bear offspring in 1 1/2 years and their males get ready in 2 years.
The female sheep and goats mate after 18-21 days for 72 hours.
Their gestation period generally lasts for 150 days.
The male sheep are emasculated after 1-2 months for getting good quality of meat.
Looking at the increasing demand and less production of eggs and meat in the country the Indian government is paying attention to the development of poultry farming.
The poultry farming business can be initiated with lost cost and more and more profit can be achieved.
Protein is an essential element of food.
Apart from pulses they can be easily taken from eggs.
The weight of a standard size of egg is 50-60 grams.
Hen takes less time and begin to lay eggs in around 6 months.
When hens are reared for meat then they take even lesser time and get ready in around 1.5-2 months.
The process of making eggs in the genitals and hatching takes around 24 hours.
The process of coming out of the baby from the eggs takes places naturally and also by a artificial technique using an incubator.
A large section of Indian population is vegetarian.
Their protein supplement is fulfilled by milk only.
Hence milk is an integral organ of human diet.
280 m.l/per person of milk consumption is essential but its achievement is difficult.
At present the availability is 263 m.l per day/per person.
Hence promotion of dairy trade is extremely important.
The success of dairy business depends on the fact that the average milk production of the cattle should be more.
Milk is the most significant food of the nature.
The amount of mineral salts present in milk is little less than the required mineral salts for human body.
Particularly iron and copper salts are negligible in amount.
Majority of the people in our country are vegetarians.
Milk has a special significance.
The milk adulteration is measured through lactometer.
The relative density is determined through lactometer.
The relative density of cow ` s pure milk is 1.028 at 60 degree F while the relative density of buffalo ` s milk is 1.032.
The number of bacteria is present in the milk developed in our country is huge.
Despite total information regarding clean milk production of the people engaged in milk business, the milk gets contaminated.
Milking is also an art.
The objective of milking is to get all the milk from the breast.
The success of dairy business depends a lot on the milking technique.
The work of milking is mostly done using hands in our country.
Milking is also done using machines but its use is restricted to big milk industries.
Milking using hands is more prevalent in the country.
there are three major methods of milking using hands- 1. milking by bending the thumb, 2. pinching technique, 3. total hand milking. Total hand milking technique is the best technique from scientific point of view.
The age of the farm animals is quite significant for the buyers and sellers of cattle.
The age of the animal can be determined by seeing the structure, horns, nails, records and teeth conditions.
The total sum of all kinds of teeth of cows-buffaloes, sheep is 32.
The teeth covered by the front teeth are called Incisors.
In cows-buffaloes, sheep etc. they are present only in lower jaw.
When the animals get all kinds of teeth permanently then this stage is called `` full mouth `` .
This stage begins in cows and buffaloes from 5-5 1/2 years of age.
The age of the cattle can also be determined by the rings made on their horns.
The first ring appears on the cattle horn when they are three years of age.
Then after every year a new ring appears.
The formula of determining cattle age is -- cattle age= number of rings+2.
In today ` s modern and scientific age, only the artificial method of animal breding is adopted.
Rural people are also understanding the significance of artificial fertilization.
Under this method the sperms of male animal is sent to the genital organs of female at proper time and place using machines.
This kind of method helps in improving the breed.
The first artificial fertilization in India was set up in 1939 in Mysore by Dr. Sammat Kumaran.
The knowledge of which elements and what amount of elements should be fed to the cattle is essential for successful cattle rearing.
Then only the cattle keeper can get good production from the animals and can prepare powerful animals able to bear weights.
The animals consistently require food elements and energy for bodily growth and works such as breathing, digestion, milk ejection etc. and also to remain alive.
Like humans animals also need salts, mineral salts and vitamins.
Salts, mineral salts do not accumulate in the body, they come out in the form of urine or sweat.
Hence their regular supply should be fixed. Similarly some other mineral salts such as calcium phosphorous etc. are also essential for the building of bones and teeth.
Therefore the elderly animals should be regularly given 60 grams of salt and 30 grams of bone meal or khadia.
Vitamins are a kind of life elements.
They have significant contribution in functioning of almost all the bodily processes.
Diseases occur in a scarcity of any single vitamin.
Every organ of animal body whether external or internal has a different function.
The determination of whether the animal is good or bad is done on the basis of the structure and functioning of these organs.
Hence the external bodily structure of an animal has integral relationship with its bodily functions.
For example chest, big circle on chest, development of lungs and heart express that.
Similarly slanting back of bulls with quick walking and running are considered good while the best quality of milking cow should have plain back.
The common temperature of animal, pulse rate and breathing rate signifies its complete health.
The differences symbolizes animal ` s ill heath or uncommonness.
The common temperature of cows-buffaloes should be 101.5 degree F and that of sheep-goats should be 103 degree F.
The common pulse rate of cows and buffaloes is 40-60/min and that of sheep and goats is 65-85/min.
Similarly the respiration rate of cows and buffaloes is 12-18/min and that of sheep and goats is 12-20/min.
The animals are majorly infected by contagious diseases.
Majority of the diseases spread by microbes such as bacteria, virus, fungus and protozoa.
The cattle keepers should carefully take measure to save their animals from these diseases.
Prevention is better than cure otherwise it become difficult to treat when the animal catches disease.
In order to prevent from the disease firstly the diseased animal should be kept away from the healthy animals so that the disease does not catch other animals. The animals should be regularly given different kinds of vaccines.
Hence there are two kinds of medicines for various diseases.
In the first category the medicines are used internally in the animal ` s body and in the second category the medicines are used externally.
Internally the animal is given medicine in the form of tablets, capsules, syrup, liquid, sauce, chyle etc.
I order to get quick effects of medicine the medicine is supplied in the form of injection.
Externally the animals are given medicine by putting ointment or powder on the wound or by dressing it, bathing the animal in a solution of medicine, plaster and oil massage.
There are 7 Central animal breeding farms in the country- Surajgadh(Rajasthan), Chiplima and Simliguda(Odisha), Dhamrod(Gujrat), Haissar ghatta (Karnataka), Almadi(Tamilnadu) and Andeshnagar (Uttar Pradesh).
The role of women in cattle rearing and dairy industry is 71% of total labor force.
Around 16.84 million women and 22.45 million humans are involved.
Bio-technology shows the scattered vision of future which helps in treating various kinds of diseases and gives nutrition to our expansive population and saves our environment.
Hence all these areas are under technology.
` Vision Document-2001 ` was made for the development of bio-technology which mentions reaching new heights in bio-technological research, framing it as per the interest of poor etc.
Common facts related to bio-technology.
It is essential to take care of human resource development, creative development, industrial and educational exchange, technological transfer, commercialization, biotech park, rules-regulations, human thinking and understanding, trust and participation for making bio-technology useful.
India is progressing significantly to achieve unparalleled capacity in bio technology which include sustainable food related problems, nutrition security, health care and use of various organic sources.
The major efforts in agriculture are being carried in the development of transgenic, purity of protocol genetic conversion tissue culture, exhibition program for gardening and forest species, molecular taxonomy, bio-pesticides, bio-fertilizers, animal wealth, aquaculture and sea organism technology.
Further soil salts, anti-dryness, anti-insect research areas are also there.
`` Mission mode program `` - bioinformatic networks have been established by major research institutions of the universities on Bamboo and ratanjot(Jaitropa diesel plant).
Cotton(Cotton-Coker FR)- development of trans genetics in cotton by using Cry 1 A(c).
Mustard(brasica jantia)- Finding 55% more production over national check varuna(T-59) through ` TMH-1 hybrid for the production of transgenic seeds.
Development of ` Allelo chemical- Azardiranchtin- A ` neem product for insect control.
It should be noted that India re-achieved the patent of neem in 2005 which was taken by Amecica ` s WR Grace Company in 1999.
Development of rhizo bacteria ` Fomes Lamoensis ` for the growth of tea plants.
There have been remarkable research for the development of `` Maxican beetle `` to control carrot grass(Parthenium hyterophorus).
Astrogenic activity is seen in turmeric, fenugreek and sesame infusion.
A CD (Sasya Sampada) has been released on 10th December, 2004 on sapling biological resources,which consists of 2500 sapling species and 700 medicinal plants.
CD of 575 infusions of botanical pesticides of 48 plants have also been prepared.
Animal Bio-technology- ` somatic cell nuclear transfer technique ` has been developed for the development of embryo in mouse and buffalo clone.
Buffalo genomics program has been started at 6 centers of the country.
Tissue culture studies are ongoing on for the development of bamboo, eucalyptus and dry region species.
Projects on genetic varieties of teak, pines, eucalyptus and kaijurina are being encouraged.
In the field of biodiversity Salt tolerant genes ` A marina ` has been separated from ` Pooni IR-20 ` , a variety of rice. And salt tolerance is found in the seeds of next generation.
Molecular studies are ongoing on brinjal, phylanthus, atlantia, vigna microlitima etc.
Agriculture is a process of making best use of earth resources by humans for the fulfillment of initial objectives such as food, fodder, fiber, fuel etc.
for example- crop production, fruits production, flower production, vegetable production, cattle rearing, bee keeping, silkworm rearing, lac insect rearing, wormiculture and fish rearing.
The development of agriculture in the world began before 1000 BC, whose short description(till 20C mid) exists.
The development of agriculture in India- India proves its claim of being an agriculture dominant country with its consistently increasing production and has achieved major place in the world in the field of agricultural development.
Still around 17.6 % share of national income is achieved through agriculture and it is true that around 65-70 % population of our country is associated with agriculture for livelihood.
Not only this in fact every citizen of the country is directly or indirectly associated with agriculture.
The major job of the population spending life in villages in agriculture only.
`` Dasyu killing `` was a term given to the encounter of Aryans and tribals after their invasion to India and settling in eastern Afghanistan, north-western border states, Kashmir, Punjab, some parts of Sindh and Rajasthan.
The oldest religious book of the Aryans speak about the food habit of the Aryans which mentions the use of milk, ghee, vegetables etc.
The tradition of eating sheep and goat ` s meat was also there.
There are 21 references of agriculture in the Rigveda.
The arrival of monsoon was a good sign and plowing began then after.
18th and 19th Century- During this period the significance of agricultural research and agricultural education was negligible.
Foreign companies brought several crops and fruits and flowers of the new world.
The business men were interested in producing commercial crops such as indigo, cotton, jute, tea and sugarcane.
British period- During this period also no attention was paid on agriculture.
In 1885 BC agriculture department was established in Bihar.
In 1906 Imperial agricultural institute, Pusa(Darbhanga) was established.
During 1905-1907 6 agricultural universities were opened in entire India, which consisted of Sabaur(Bihar), Layalpur(Punjab) now in Pakistan, Kanpur(Uttar Pradesh), Pune(Maharashtra), Coimbatore(Tamil nadu) and Nagpur(Maharashtra).
Second phase(1968-88)- It was called `` Green Revolution period `` .
Though good symptoms were seen in agriculture since 1965 which began under the development of 1940 decade in United States of america and spread in the world with other crops.
This revolution was seen in India under wheat and paddy during end of 1960 decade(1966-67).
The specialties were- advanced technologies, more capital investment and more agricultural production. The land became restricted but the production increased and providing food to the increasing human population became a major objective(which reached around 5 billion).
For the past 60 years since 1950-51 to 2010-11, there were several changes in the country , which were remarkable.
The contribution of agriculture in national gross product(GDP)has definitely reduced, it was 52.2% during 1950-51 and reduced to 14.1% during 2011-12 while during this period food grain increased from 50.8 m.l tonne to 224.78 m.l tonne which means there was 4 1/2 times growth. Wheat production increased up to 85.93 m.l tonnes.
There was 7 times increase in rice, 4 times increase in maize and 3 times increase in banana and sugarcane.
Apart from bringing self dependence on food front, records were made in the production of dairy, hens, fish rearing, vegetables, fruits etc.
Before independence we had to import 10-12 m.l tonnes food grain and today we are able to send them.
Agriculture(Grass)- The main objective of meteorological regional planning was to manage the regional resources in a scientific way so that the increasing demand of 5 Fs(Food, Feed, Fodder, Fiber and Fuel) is supplied without affecting available natural resources and ecological level. This objective is known as ` Holistic Approach ` , where there is proper combination of crop production and related activities such as gardening, forestry, cattle rearing,crop production testing and agricultural resources etc.
Proper analysis and evaluation of the capacity and future of various regions.
Maintaining a balance between macro demand and availability of major useful products at national level.
Providing maximum pure profit to the producers.
Creating more job opportunities for the benefit of landless labors.
Creating a long term future structure for the scientific and even pace of the use of natural resources mainly land, water and forestry.
Planning and implementation facility were kept as the main objective while marking these regions along with long grass climatic similarities.
District was considered as the smallest unit while marking the social population of the region.
Later it was felt that though these 15 regions largely depict crop climate but if we see the proficient diversities in mind then the above mentioned regions would definitely not depict evenness while preparing expansive plan.
Similarly the current prevalent dis-balance in agricultural development and villagers income could be reduced and in the coming years agriculture will develop.
Though there will be much expenditure on core strategies such as land and water management, animal wealth and agricultural resources etc.
Then only the rate of development in agricultural sector will be stable.
The integrated method of providing food to the local people is significant.
Undoubtedly the research dissolution is weak here which should be increased.
Jhum cultivation should be reduced.
Because this region has the capacity of producing more in forestry and gardening.
Therefore total package should be prepared for the availability, marketing and storage of capital investments(good seeds, plants, fertilizers and pesticides).
Emphasis should be laid on minor irrigation, small ponds should be deepened and wells should be dug.
Good seeds should be made available.
Emphasis should be laid on fodder storage for animals.
The production of crops, animals and fish rearing.
Advanced water management methods should be developed.
Emphasis on slat affected land reform.
Proper use of underground water.
Emphasis should be laid on pulses in crop diversification and crop methodologies.
The diversification of fodder, fruits and vegetable farming is essential.
Emphasis should be laid on breeding, nutrition and management for getting good animals.
Emphasis should be laid on the use of advanced research techniques.
Industries based on fruits, vegetables should be established.
Emphasis should be laid on adopting dry cultivation technique.
Emphasis should be laid on fertilizer use by doing crop exhibition.
Attention should be on minor irrigation.
There should be arrangement for good quality fodder for animals.
Salty and alkaline soil should be reformed.
Country ` s 20% rice and 17% groundnut is produced here therefore they should be focused.
There is no irrigation facility for around 70% of agriculture holding hence water management program should be adopted for the development of ponds.
Collecting rain water & micro pond building.
Digging of wells and fixing shallow tube wells.
Increasing the production of rice and thick grains and mangoes, banana & coconuts should be taken for gardening.
Emphasis should be laid on building equipped boats to catch fish in deep ocean, fish storage, preservation, transportation facility through co-operative institutions.
Emphasis should be laid on prawn culture in salty water and barren lands should be reformed.
Small and big ponds should be developed.
The development and spread of fertilizer effective varieties of groundnut, cotton, millet and sorghum that matures soon should be quick.
The canals should be regularly run, shallow tube wells should be properly planted during summers.
Special emphasis should be laid on agricultural forestry and dry gardening and granaries should be developed.
Managing Crop/agricultural method for the fulfillment of increasing food demand by humans in the changing scenario in such a way that a perfect balance is maintained between environment and situation is called even pace cultivation.
In the recent decades the agricultural situation of the world has changed socially, politically, economically, technically and environmentally.
Reason- Necessity for sustainable agriculture was felt because of the excessive exploitation of land, water and environment in order to meet the demands of increasing human food, clothing, shelter. It means to make successful use of the agricultural resources to fulfill the changing demands of human so that natural resources are not wasted and environment also remains safe.
Hence sustainable agriculture can be kept in triangular form.
A farmer always does cultivation keeping cost incurred/profit in mind.
Hence while spending a rupee, there should be a profit of at least 2.25 Rs. that means a profit of 1:2:5.
More and more profit should be gained from the crops used in agricultural crop methods then only that method would be adopted otherwise it would be changed and another method would be used. For this which appropriate crop related agricultural policy should be prepared for growing crops and support price for all the crops by the government would be determined.
Sustainability is not a slogan but an essential necessity of future.
Therefore a co-ordination between these three( food-population, land-water environment and profit-loss proportion)is essential then only humans will be able to feed their stomachs.
Along with adopting cropping systems agri-business based cultivation that is a thinking of farming system should be adopted.
Major sources- energy, water, land and human power should be properly organized.
Special emphasis should be laid on carbonic farming, bio-fertilizers, bio-technology etc.
Integrated management- fertilizers, insect problem, weeds, water management etc should be emphasized.
The blind use of fertilizers and chemicals in agriculture has compelled us to think that certainly these chemical elements are harmful for our health.
For example today these chemicals are blindly being used in vegetables(brinjal, tomato, chili, potato etc.),fruits(banana, mango), cotton, sugarcane etc.
After all think what will the future of this cultivation.
The major markets of neem oil are there in Guntur, Vijaywada in Andhra Pradesh and in Raipur(M.P.)
The average rate of neem oil is 2000-2500 Rs / tonne which keeps increasing and decreasing as per demand and supply.
Neem purifies the environment and also cleans human blood.
Chewing 5-10 neem leaves everyday cures various blood impurities.
Neemex organic neem manure and insect control element are also used in farming which increases the production capacity of soil, tasty poison free , healthy ` organic food ` for humans.
Putting 125-150 kg/hectare before sowing after every six months is beneficial for paddy, pulses, and oil seed crops.
Putting 500-1000 gm / tree in fruit trees after every six months is beneficial.
Vermicompost is also known as vermi culture or earthworm rearing.
Vermi compost is the manure prepared from cow dung, dry and green leaves, hay, paddy straw, remains of maize/ millet farms, dairy wastes, city garbage etc. by earthworms.
It is a natural, complete and balanced diet manure for all kinds of plants, trees, vegetables, crops etc.
It can provide employment opportunities to unemployed youth, housewives and coming generations. Further the problem of environmental pollution can also be resolved.
Method of preparation- Collect the garbage(stems of maize/millet, dry leaves)and weeds from farm and home and put them in a pit in rows of 3 ` x1 ` x1 ` cubic meters layers and allowed to stay in shade. Then after earthworms available in packets are left in the pit.
They grow and eat these materials and make excreta which is known as vermi-compost.
They make manure in around 1.5 months, a compost of 3-5 cubic meter is achieved from the above mentioned row. They contain more amount of N,P,K .
The places where earthworms were reared have shown 70% increase in peas, 28-110 % in grass, 25% in apples, 290 % in beans, 300% in wheat and the storage capacity/ secure quality of crop production has been reformed.
In order to get good results from vermi-compost, it is essential to cover with leaves etc. after putting them in plants.
Do not use chemical fertilizers, insecticide, fungicide, weedicide along with vermi-compost.
The amount of vermi-compost in the land in the first year should be 5 tonnes/hectare, 2.5 tonnes/hectare in the second year and 1.25/hectare in the third year.
150-300 grams per pot should be given for flowers in pot.
` Mushroom ` is a fungus which is a very tasty and nutritive food item and is used also to make vegetables.
They are primarily found in big hotels at high rates.
They can be grown without soil/sand on paddy straw.
The proper temperature to grow them should be between 22-30 degree Celsius.
They are also known as vegetarian meat because they contain less of carbohydrate and fats.
Ketchup and curry items are prepared from mushroom.
The bad odor in mushroom comes because of corola+alkaloids.
Generally mushroom becomes fit to be used as vegetable in 20 days.
The cost incurred is 7 Rupees/kg and can be sold at the rate of 25-30 Rupees.kg.
Strains of two new products - NCB-6 and NCB-12 of warm swet button were released by NRC solan.It produced 15 kg fresh khumb from 100 kg compost in six weeks.
Growing plants and trees with crops so that one also gets the benefit of wood for fuel, green fodder, increase in organic manure along with grain production. Agro-forestry includes Wheat+popular method.
Agro forestry should be carried with land use system and technology where along with beneficial trees, crops of various seasons(paddy,oil-seeds, pulses, fibers, fodder etc.) are also grown.
Apart from food grains, all the essential articles such as green fodder for animals, grains, fuel, fibers, fruits, fertilizers etc. are easily available.
Wheat/potatoes/mustard/poplar agro forestry - It should be mentioned that during winters (November-April)rabi crops shed their leaves.And the biggest benefit is that they do not affect wheat/potatoes/mustard.
No matter whether soil erosion is by heavy rainfall or strong wind in desert, it gets reduced by this method.
Farm labors get jobs round the year.
Environment can be improved.
The fallen leaves of the trees work as the manure by increasing organisms and carbon/nitrogen proportion is balanced.
Getting more and more production by utilizing effective use of rain water.
Reforming land by making alternative use of useless/barren land through collection of nutrients.
Providing employment opportunities to unemployed and agricultural labors.
Making reforms by organizing environment, situation and climate.
Agro-forestry plays an important role in making agriculture sustainable which is proved by the research done in recent years.
The soil fertility has reduced because of adopting dense methods, not adopting proper crop cycle, blindly spraying of chemicals, soil erosion. The influence of nutrients over crop production has reduced, production has become stable.
Hence Agro forestry is a good alternative in such situations, especially in increasing production and maintaining ecology balance.
Therefore certainly it can be said that there adoption of agro-forestry is extremely important and there is good scope for it in the future.
Agricultural farming and forestry are concerned with the production of food and other goods.
Agriculture was a major development which became a reason of the evolution of cultures. Here, pet animals were reared, plants were grown which produced extra food.
With this dense population and the development of leveled society were made able.
The study of agriculture is known in the form of agricultural science(Gardening study, a concerned practice is done in horticulture).
Several varieties of techniques and specialties are carried under agriculture.
They contained those techniques where available land is expanded to grow plants. For this water channels are dug and other forms of irrigation are used.
Growing crops on arable land and grazing animals on pasture and rangeland by shepherds are mainly concerned with agriculture.
Identifying various forms of agriculture and their proportionate growth became the main goals of thought in the last century.
In the developed world it is extended from range organic agriculture(for example, permaculture or organic agriculture)till dense agriculture(example industrial agriculture).
