Various issues like love, war, history, religious unity, freedom struggle, robbery problem, poverty, unemployment, exploitation, atrocity etc. are raised but only one type of method was adopted in these .
Entertainment used to be kept in the focus in these films, so enough earning could be earned in cinema halls .
Because of being much more imaginative and based on dreams, the impact of these films had badly on teens and children because atmosphere in the home was not as it had in the movies .
Thus, conflict and struggle began in the families .
Promotion of the openness of love happens to the extent that obscene incidents started on roads and schools .
Due to the kitschy song, dance and music, cheapness and commercialism in interest was bound to come .
To counter this cheapness art films were made but use of this formulas increasing there slowly to boost income .
With the aim of ban objectionable material in the films Cinematography Act was made in 1918, which was implemented in 1920 .
Initially, Nudity, obscenity, protest against Englishmen, hurting religious sentiments etc things were kept in mind while censor .
The Cinematography Act was passed in 1952 after Independence .
This committee did not consider kiss, nudity and violence as a matter of prohibition, if such scenes are necessary in the films .
Some people think that censorship should not implement on the films and they should provide complete freedom .
This is not entirely possible because impact of the films is very wide and deep .
Therefore, unwanted scenes can have a bad effect on the mind of children or adolescents .
Take care of the interests of all sections of society is necessary .
Harmony in the society could be eliminated by unnecessary violence, sex, suspense, religious fanaticism, etc.
By Doordarshan advertisers have benefited the most .
This is the reason, despite increase in advertising rates on Doordarshan, advertising are excessive .
Advertisement is also an easy means of giving information and providing things and services to the people .
Era of advertisement in newspapers started from the beginning of twentieth century but revolutionary changes happened with the advent of radio and television .
Films are running on the basis of advertisements in the cinema halls .
Culture of nowaday is the culture of advertisement .
Each and every person wants to buy the same things, which are being advertised because it becomes a status symbol .
Thus any information or news easily spread and popularized by advertising .
Children and teens demand the same things, they hear or see advertisement of the things .
in our country 0.22 percent of total national income is spend on the ads, which is the lowest compared to other countries of the world .
This expenditure is now slowly growing .
Public relation is also a kind of free advertising .
How is the image of any department in public, this much depends on advertising or public relations officer of that department .
Due to increasing competition in market expenditure of advertisement is also grown .
Mutual struggle happens between industries through this advertisement, thus most industrialists more focus on making beautiful advertisement rather than making beautiful product .
They spend more on pack and colour etc of the object rather than quality .
This is a kind of cheating with the consumers and therefore people do not easily believe on advertisement because they know that to hide the low quality of the product they giving flashy advertisement .
With the help of music, songs, good looking boy-girls, acting etc. business of making advertisement more enticing and attractive has started .
Massage or information given through these advertisements, refines daily routine of the citizens, improves in it .
Due to advertisements uniformity and sophistication came today in interest, fashion and bilateral relation .
Advertisements has great contibution in raising persons ` general knowledge and giving more information about modern productions .
But due to increasing competition of advertisement, level, credibility and popularity of advertisement also affected badly .
Consumers find themselves victim of breach of trust or fraud because of difference between word and work .
It is often complained that over praise is done in advertisement about quality and use of the product but there is a lower quality of goods advertised .
For poor people, compelling advertisement increases flagellation .
Where clean drinking water is not available, beautiful heroin covered with the fan of soap under colourful fountains will only increase pain of the audience .
Some wealthy industrialists are succeed in the consumption of shoddy goods in the market on the basis of advertisement however honest industrialist could not sell great product in the market due to less spending on advertisement .
All means of communication are meant to communicate to common people but nowadays direct and effective communication between people and administration is necessary .
Thus aim of public relation is to establish meaningful dialogue between both counterparts, so any institution or department can avail public support or confidence of the people .
Public trust and public support is particularly important in a democracy, therefore nowadays public relation department is established in every small to large departments .
So, relation could be established in a systematic method .
Qualifications of modesty, courtesy, affability, humor, patience and originality is required in a good public relation officer, then only he can establish a better communication .
In mythology, sage Narada is portrayed as a public relation officer .
Public relations officer always should be buoyant, cheerful, who tolerate criticism and effective in conversation .
Relation is not established only by food .
People can achieve harmony by their mild-mannered .
This is the reason that such employees employed at reception and telephone exchange, who can bear decency of formalities of conversation .
Such kinds of reception rooms have also been set up in the administrative departments, so perfect image of government could present to the public .
The complaint letter should answer immediately .
After investigation the results of the investigation should be sure to write in the letter .
While answering polite language should use .
They should settle compensation claims .
Letters of thanks or greetings on the special occasions or festivals should send to the regular letter senders .
Image of the public relations officer should be indisputable in society .
Help of lie should not be taken while establishing public relation, otherwise it would harm rather than benefit after some time .
Each and every public relation officer should ensure that human rights of every citizen remain protected .
He will follow the general principles of morality .
He will maintain excellent of his character and behaviour .
No participation in any such institution or activities which are contrary to human dignity .
Services of public relation departments are not available in rural areas, so the government policies are less publicised there .
Development of this section reasonably happened in organized sector in the cities and it is considered a effective weapon of success of industry .
Each industry has established their department of mixing journalism and public relation .
This department has very promising future in our country .
Capability, utility or success of mass media depends on the reliability of these mediums .
Ownership of the means of communication is either in the hands of capitalist of private sector or in the hands of the government .
Both ownerships operate within their limits .
Some journalists say that in the name of national security government often gives false statements however journalist do not speak lie knowingly .
Press has total freedom of expression in the U.S.
Maybe because of this, freedom of mutual distrust is also there .
Like America condition is deteriorating in democratic and developing counties .
Public confidence is being get down from both the press and the government .
The press do highly harsh criticism however the government is used to exaggerated figures .
Press should follow the same true allegiance, which is expected from officers or politicians .
Journalist should not form any coalition or agreement with politician or government official because this coalition can hide truth as both are against each-other .
While writing report or dialogue utmost care should be taken, otherwise politician and officers are quoted saying that their statement wrongly published .
Reliability is thus fragmented .
Enough proof should be for dialogue .
Policy related matter should be discussed in the basic materials, not policy .
Policy must be more explained .
If you do not have correct information, then remain silent is more appropriate .
He should avoid giving the wrong information .
But this does not mean that truth should be hidden .
Sometimes false information is given in hurry and later apology is expressed .
Personal matters should not be made part of the information and news .
Information of the interest of common people should be given prominence .
Government and non-government medium work as a competitor of each-other, thus information are being checked .
Opposition parties keep control over activities of the government .
Press also play role of the opposition .
But criticism should be based on the facts and also should be positive .
Opposition for the sack of opposition and the yellow journalism for taking advantage are also decrease reliability .
Reliability is directly related to the acceptance of an object or idea .
If reliability of any medium is low than it ` s effect also will be limited and wanted changes will not be possible .
Even this is happening in the matter of advertisement .
Usually people do not believe on advertisements because the details about quality or kind mentioned, not found with the product .
The first condition for reliability is that the medium must be free to act .
If fact is tempered for any aim, whether it may be government medium or non-government medium, it is hard to maintain reliability .
Issue of freedom of press and autonomy for radio and Doordarshan is being raised for years .
Spirit in this is that interests of communication service could be protected and no one can misuse communication service in order to fulfill their own interests .
There were many controls on press in pre-independent India, which were fought by the press with courage .
Freedom struggle received most power from the Indian press .
Whenever fight with the old traditions or superstitions happened, press led in this .
Such campaigns face opposition at the start but press conquers such protests by its efforts .
Raja Ram Mohan Roy had to face outrage on opposing the practice of Sati .
He had to discontinue his newspaper ` Mirat Ul Akhabar ` .
Censorship was implemented during emergency, which was lifted later .
Government always favoured freedom of responsible press but it could not define yet that whom we say the responsible press .
This is correct that misuse of freedom is done more then use, thus, freedom is a dangerous weapon .
Meaning of free press will be formation of parallel government, which will criticise the government without responsibility .
Those people who use journalism for political and economic benefits, one-sided news and articles are published in their newspapers .
This is the misuse of freedom .
To prevent this misuse, time to time government imposes bans to control the press .
If this work is done by press itself by making its own code of conduct, then both the press and government will be benefitted.
Government made directive principles or code for government press like All India Radio and Doordarshan, which regulates contents of the programmes .
The way in press has right of giving news, the same way every citizen has right to live his personal life without any intervention .
Till then personal life is not affecting social life, there is no benefit in publishing personal or private life .
Due to publish highly negative coverage press has got such power that even government afraid of it .
Provoking public opinion against any person or institute is equal to deliver substantial punishment .
Sometimes this mental torture, insult or character assassination is based on false facts .
But once news is published, there is no benefit of rebuttal .
Government wants to make code of conduct against this power of the press, so people or institutions do not face unnecessary insecurity or fear .
Nowadays fear of journalist more spread in the society than the police because everyone has fear of insult .
Fear of journalist is spread in the society rather than thief-robber .
Because of this sometime loss occurs than gain, people are demoralised and doubt, infidelity and distrust emerges even towards right and conscientious person .
Powers of a media person are more than a supreme ruler of the country because he has not direct responsibility or participation .
From where he got and how he got unlimited right of criticism- yet the fact remains a secret .
Sometimes it seems that only journalists are free in the country .
Administration is afraid of this unlimited power only and raising issue of code of conduct time and again, which press has not accepted yet .
Administration got most benefit of free press because press helps in government ` s functioning in many ways .
Main function of the press is to highlight the flaws of the system .
Government assess the activities of its employees on the basis of press reports .
The apathy, tardiness and corruption, that is rampant at different levels of government, press investigates this .
The press provides information on possible developments of the future .
On basis this, government makes its policies .
Government was of the opinion that control should be over press in developing country, which is not acceptable .
The first duty of press is to disclose things like misuse of public expenditure and arbitrary abuse of office .
Exploratory and research journalism is more need of our country .
Rates of government advertisements are low, they should be increased so newspapers - magazines get economic independence .
It was also considered that radio and Doordarshan should be granted autonomy .
Tendency of monopoly over sources of information is not fair .
In developed countries, where people are rich and capable to protect their interest, there is no harm in keeping these mediums in private sector .
In 1964, when Smt. Indira Gandhi took the post of Information and broadcast minister in central ministry, she had constituted a committee .
Former CAG Mr. A. K. Chandra made head of this committee .
The Committee recommended that separate corporations should be made for the AIR and Doordarshan .
Natural process of social and economic change use to be very slow and it takes too long in change .
No system can bear this slow change with patience because that requires to present report card of its achievement .
If the rate of change is slow than government is considered as fail and inefficient .
Use of mass communication is widespread done for this work, so common people can be prepared for the change updated information .
Person easily not gets ready for change .
This is the most difficult process .
When guarantee of more benefit and security is there, then only person adopts unconventional new thoughts .
Therefore, situation of tug of war of two opposing forces is in our country .
On section wants to do immediate change and second a large section does not want to leave traditional structure due to fear of insecurity .
Currently balance is tipped of traditionalists .
A section of truth is in this statement but today pressure of science and technique is so much that conversion speed has become very fast .
Now, we had to enough change even to stay in the same place .
Niether human is been tried to change not human is taken care .
Civilasation changes over nightly while people use to follow old traditions .
Peoples ` acceptance and peoples ` participation is also needed .
If people participation is not in these development works, than these works or developments have no meaning .
Government has followed policy of liberalisation in last two years and process of privatisation has been encouraged in trade-business .
Government is helping private players in economic sector, so loss making industries do not become a burden on the country .
The results of this policy are found .
Inflation has come down to 6 percent from 10 and foreign currency fund is increased .
This policy found widespread propagation with the help of electronic media .
Some journalists assume that any strong power is needed for the change .
The power who decides to start change, its readiness is an important component .
Sometimes half hearted missions eliminated in between .
Big schemes or idealist policies take more time in implementation .
Therefore enthusiasm not remains towards them .
The concrete encouragement should be given for acceptance of any scheme .
For example, mid-day meal in schools is excellent encouragement .
Economic incentives are also effective for family planning .
These incentives should be permanent so people adopt any scheme regularly .
Approach means that a sense of generosity towards any new plan or progressive ideas .
If this is not the sense, than even beautiful and useful plan can not be accepted .
It is necessary for any plan or policy to be related with context, otherwise risk of being excluded from society always will be there .
Intercaste marriage is not popularised because it is accepted at legal level, but could not get accepted in the social milieu .
Even family planning scheme has to do struggle for social acceptance .
Values related to the caste, religion, language cannot be broken together .
Change should not be started directly .
With the proliferation of education person automatically loves change .
Most changes in the society could not take place because women are not taken in confidence .
If women are educated, naturally process of the change will be fast .
Adequate education should be given to teen boys and girls because this the age for change or accepting change .
After the age of 30-35 person use to be anti-change .
Thus, more focus should be given on people who are under the age of 30 .
Entertainment element should be given prominence in the dissemination and publicity .
Local leader should be deployed for propagation rather than outsider officers and inferiority complex should not be filled in those .
The level of their way of life should not be criticised otherwise they will not accept you .
Their reputation and ego should not be hurt.
Process of change use to be very delicate, sensitive, artistic, and difficult, thus patience is required .
After independence several attempts have been taken to improve the condition of society in our country .
Some of these efforts have been successful and some have failed .
Literacy rate is 40 percent in the country which is more focused in the cities .
This percentage is further low in the women .
Newspapers cannot reach to all educated people .
Few are such newspaper in the country which has readership more than two-half and two lacs .
More than 6,000 newspapers are published all around the country .
The total numbers of copies distributed in 1974 were 92 lacs, which were increase to two crores in 1990 .
Number of monthly is more than 6,000 and distribution number is two crores .
Even if we consider number of reader of a newspaper four, readership is not more than 8 crores .
90 percent of among these readers lives in big of medium cities .
Thus press could not be considered a medium of public dialogue .
Publication of most copies is in Maharashtra and than in Kerala .
After that position is of Tamil Nadu, Bengal, and Gujarat .
Delhi has first position in the federal states .
Uttar Pradesh has the highest number of published newspapers but distirbuted copies are less there .
Maharashtra is after it but number of published copies are less there .
After this, most number of newspaper are published in Maharashtra .
Publication of newspaper is happening in the country since almost 180 years, thus their popularity is established .
Trend of economic paper, agricultural newspaper, weekly related to cooperative movement etc is increasing .
The proliferation and propagation of green revolution and machine and tools happened in rural areas, credit of this goes to newspapers .
Interest about schemes and plans of election and government is also taken in rural areas .
If newspaper made based on rural problems, local people can take benefit a lot from newspapers .
But most of the newspapers are stuffed with the news of politics of the country and abroad or rape-murder, thus due to low coverage of development activities newspapers cannot be proven more useful .
Sometimes imbalance news is also given in the lure of readership .
Therefore, role of the newspaper is more in the area of political gain rather than social and economic development .
This is the reason that time and again government expresses statement on the need of accountable press .
Publication of article on literature, science, archeology, history, general issue is popularise in last decades .
Radio is the only mass-medium for rural people who provides them information, education and entertainment .
Popularity of the Radio is much more in rural areas .
Vividh Bharati is very popular programme in the cities .
Other than Radio no one better medium for contact to the rural people .
Doordarshan will take time in this direction .
Programme of rural people is very popular in rural areas .
Separate programme are telecast for women, children, workers of the industry, youth .
Popularity of Radio is more in rural areas, therefore programmes of the rural people are listen on wide level .
Radio has played an important role in modernisation of agriculture .
In the time of Pakistan-war and freedom of Bangladesh, taking part in war on its level Radio has also obtained favorable results .
But the result expect, are not obtained .
Radio programmes are also popular and has impact but this impact is not culminated in result .
Most programmes are listened for entertainment, their aimed education could not be implemented .
Allegation of beaurocracy, laxity and apathy is also leveled on Raido like other government departments .
The number of listeners is declining day by day .
Attraction of Radio is now declining due to advent of the television .
Awareness of knowledge and surroundings of the common people has been increased by Radio programs .
There approach is has broaden and trend of keeping national interest in mind has increased .
Preservation of folk arts is also done by Radio .
Radio has highest contributionto the promotion of classical music .
Radio has main role in making sports and cultural programs a means of entertainment .
Radio has very important contribution in popularising sports like cricket, hockey etc .
But along with Radio audiences should also take initiative in this direction .
They should also listen to radio attentively leaving their inadmissibility .
This is a newly developed medium, so review of its socio-economic effects is not possible .
Even though Doordarshan has largest impact on middle class population of the urban areas .
In popularity, Doordarshan has second position after films .
But this popularity is not of programs related to the socio-economic issues .
Propagation materials on Krishi Darshan and other social issue are not such attractive .
Consumer is become more aware about its rights and women have started show of more confidence .
Krishi Darshan program is more popular .
But reach of this medium is limited to the cities, particularly to the middle class .
However it is a unique medium in increasing the rate of socio-economic change through good events .
From the cultural view, audience of our country is resistant but young section, who is majority in viewership, has capacity of fast accepting the change .
This medium is the medium of young power .
Therefore, it is more capable in bringing the change.
If the programs of television are made more related to social and economic concerns, effective result could be found .
If capacity of this medium is exploited in advertisement only, national interest will be harmed .
Being aware of ill effects of TV is also necessary .
Over entertainment and performance of glamour can mislead young generation and can divert their attention from reality of life .
Development of television culture is occurring in the cities because of effect of television .
Now this culture is entertainment oriented .
Television has a great impact on the brain of children but due to more exposure in little age balance could not be established in their personality .
Trend of getting all together, without any hard work is increasing, so apathy is visible towards passion, integrity, diligence, etc.
Therefore, even television is called ` idiot box ` .
Person can not to any other while watching television, thus he led towards lethargy and apathy .
Due to the plethora of entertainment, trend of taking television programs lightly is increasing, which can create dangerous situation .
Effect should not be limited till effect and should be result oriented .
It is not enough to impress any person or society .
This effect should be converted into positive result .
Sometimes we consider effect as a result and express satisfaction over our success .
Still effect of television has not been result oriented .
Very few audiences watch programs related to education and viewership for the program telecast for students is negligible .
This is an undisputed fact that the aim for medium of mass communication had established, could not be completed to the extent of satisfaction .
Somewhere these means are failed to reach even today .
Technical reasons are responsible for this failure in some areas and in some other areas nature of the programs is not remained communicatebale .
Radio is a cheap and easily accessible medium but number of the audiences of radio is less than expectation in rural areas .
Number of meaningful and aimed audiences is further low .
Due to not initiation of systematic group listener service or facility effect of telecast is not result oriented .
We have affiliated medium of mass communication with growth in the rate of national production .
More propaganda and its correlation should be with more production- this idea is not in accordance with the nature of communication .
Doubtless these films have impact but number of such films is low .
Government has also encouraged making of films related to the development through film division and Doordarshan but facilities of show of these films are limited .
It propagation of new technique is done while keeping in mind the poverty level, success could be achieved .
Doubtless, knowledge of technology is widespread in our country .
It seems that much care of human value and nature is not kept in means or medium of communication .
Perhaps mechanism has been considered best then human sensitivities and machine is given more importance then human being .
Therefore cultural diversity is not visible in north and south India or eastern or western parts .
Urban life style is followed in village also and meaning of development and modernity is considered as urbanisation .
Television and film very much encouraged urbanisation is the country, thus problems of the cities are increased due to urban attraction .
Few newspapers have been famous for their political commitment .
It is often alleged on Radio and Doordarshan that government uses these more for its propaganda .
Thus politics or other institutions have been dominated mediums of communications .
More lose occurs then benefit by this trend but no one solution is visible now to avoid this .
Today private life of a person has most risk from the medium of the mass communication .
There is no guarantee for security of his privacy, therefore he always live afflicted because of fear of media .
Anytime, his image will be damaged in any newspaper, due to this fear he always remain in trap of media person, which is often misused .
Number of victims of `` yellow journalism `` is not few .
Media believes in extra-exposure, therefore degree of truth decreases in same proportion .
Due to these trends of over-entertainment means of mass-communication could not succeed much more .
Approach of audience, reader, viewer and innumerable people need to be changed .
Media is not only entertainment, importance should be given to its social and economic responsibility .
Even now enough differences is there between language of figure and valuable changes .
He does not implement our information in same manner .
He does mutilations in these in expectation of profit and his means .
He more concentrates more benefits than costs while our recommendations are focused on profit rather than costs .
Fulfilling requirements of his consumption is more necessary than to meet the capital requirements .
Our focus is stayed on achieving the aim and those whom we want to inspire, no permanent change take place in their attitude .
This fulfillment of aim cannot take a sustainable basis .
Development and modernity is considered same condition in our country, therefore we start the talk of development with modernization .
More capital requires for modernisation while this is not available in the lack of sources .
Our medium of mass-communication everyday propagates new technology forgetting local needs .
Complete approach of person on the level of consumption is being modern while complete structure of production is still traditional .
Our means of communication help in increasing demand of consumption .
We do not more focus on production of those things, employment and availability of resources.
Meaning of development is to establish balance between consumption and production .
If it became unbalanced then risk of price rise will remain forever .
Peoples ` faith in listening to such kind of preaches ends .
This is a reason that excellent development, propagation of literature could not be more viable .
Production capacity could not be increased by growth in consumption expenditure .
Principles of English economist John Maynard Keynes are not fit in our agricultural economy .
Due to more spend on consumption very few means use to left for capital investment .
More struggle and distrust between human being is increased .
Reason is clear that information and news are available in such quantity that human personality cannot limit it in itself .
It so much shattering that mutual trust, faith and sense of security themselves are destroyed .
He always afraid of the people close to himself .
Atmosphere of insecurity is rising because now person wants to become more rich by adopting short-cut .
When over-exposure of personal life of people, culture, tradition and life style occurs, a doubt or insecurity emerges .
Even today this feeling is existed in tribal areas .
Outsider person or outsider means of information is considered from the viewpoint of insecurity or attack in these areas .
New informations can make popular there only keeping their culture and atmosphere protected .
This is a technical problem rather than a problem of human relationships, which should be taken with more depth and sensitivity .
Trend of hiding and trend of runaway looking any outsider person is still existed in rural areas .
Cities also have this tendency .
Therefore work of any messager or informer social and culture activist is hard .
In such areas programs of radio or television are not listen or seen on personal level .
Arrangement of make listen to and show programs in groups should be here .
Broadcast or sending of information only is not communication .
Cultural imbalance is also happened due to sudden denial of old values of life .
Work of bring this into practice is couldn ` t get started .
A big gap is became due to hesitation in adopt of new and abandon of old .
This should be result of a natural process .
Some people think that first changes should be imposed forcefully, then people will accept them .
This kind of change doubtlessly become succeeds speedily but hurts psychology .
Whom we are changing, they should not take revenge from us becoming angry- this thing should be kept in mind .
Social acceptance, consent should be given importation for propagation .
Our education or news style increases our information but this information does not make our rites superior ​​.
We have considered education and culture similarly factor .
Our youth section is educationally rich but culturally poor .
Due to this contradiction he becomes victim of various kinds of anti-social activities .
Problem of dissemination of culture is in front of mass-communication .
Education is spreading but qualitative improvement has not happened in humanity .
Our aim should be to make human being cultured rather than educated violent-animal .
To stop this cultural devaluation Government of India has planned to implement the new education policy .
This is a good effort and we should try to more emphasis on this through medium of mass-communication .
Though this policy should have been implemented long ago but this type of education is very much required nowadays .
Keeping this fact in mind it was decided to established 112 local radio stations in seventh scheme in our country .
Some of which are started work .
Mutual trust and faith will be emphasised due to linking education with our traditional culture .
To maintain communication between people contribution of the traditional arts could be greater .
These mediums should be exploited .
Performing arts should be specially featured .
Our inclination is remain focused on the professional study of these arts and their performing capability cannot get developed .
Newspapers can give importance to news related to development by their reporting and giving more space .
A bank should be established of excellent programs in the areas of agriculture, industry, women culture, children culture, culture etc .
Programs for all medium should be created in this bank .
Newspapers have established feature agency for their use .
Level of these programs should be excellent, so audiences can receive excellent programs .
Number of programs of group-communication or direct meet should also be increased so personal contact should be developed .
Use of marriage, feast, festival, fairs, pilgrimage etc. should be for propagation of development related programs .
This should be also tried that people should come in more contact with each other .
Reality should be seen coming out of the studio and open discussion should be done on crucial problems of the life .
Our mediums of communication have entered in the developed conditions, so we should use this power in the interest of the society .
Reach of the electronic medium has risen due to satellite telecast facility .
Several foreign broadcast services are also involved in influencing our audiences .
Doordarshan is also not behind in this age of competition .
If we will get momentum in economic growth, new era of prosperity can come in our country .
Government is giving new form to economy while implementing new economic policies .
Mediums of communication are involve in the direction of making this effort succeed .
It ` s a good sign .
Growing the rate of development and streamlining the efforts towards creating a socialist society in India is the main work of means of mass-communication .
The attainment of a definite aim is necessary for the radio and television because of being in the control of government .
The mediums of private sector always not able to move in this direction because interest of the owner and manager is foremost there and care of economy of the medium is also keep in the attention .
Means of government control have not to face any competition on the level of business .
Thus adequate study should be done of limitations and facilities of government control .
Newspaper and films are in private sector in our country and Doordarshan and radio are in public sector .
Therefore no question comes of monopoly of government or private sector .
Therefore, there is complete freedom to the newspaper of private sector .
But mediums of both sectors have different limitations and different aims also .
Only keeping these aims in mind any medium or means of communication can decides it plan or policy .
Too much overstatement is seen in these kinds of medium because administration and law and order is not the responsibility of these medium .
Therefore results of these means cannot be challenged .
Opposite to this, both word and work are in the front of the government, so its work becomes harder .
Neither he can comment on his own programs and nor he can politely praise his all successes.
He cares of interests of audiences and viewers before publishing news .
This responsibility is of government medium to take care of their morale .
Government not only expresses sympathy, it needs to give solution also .
Only sympathy is not solution .
Due to financial and administrative help many worried to don’t haunt medium of communication .
But due to not been completely free, the facilities available from administration, they occasionally also found harmful .
Numbere of newspaper and magazines is day to day increasing but their readership is negligible .
The numbers of such newspaper is not low, circulated freely .
While registration this thing specially should be kept in mind that their minimum readership should be certain .
Free press does not mean freedom of printing press only .
Any newspaper or magazine should not be published only for getting advertisement and for getting status of journalist .
The ratio of advertisement and publish content should be strictly followed .
The newspaper does not represent the advertisers only .
A code of conduct should be made for reporter .
In other democratic countries, especially in America, a detail code of conduct is there for mass communication .
It is another matter that it does not comply faithfully .
Maybe this violation is also come under the periphery of their freedom .
Control should be over magazines of cheap entertainment .
Exploitation of religion, sex, violence etc should not be for profit making .
Violence and courage are not synonyms of each other .
More review of the magazine publishing children ` s literature is expected .
Characteristic of women is always shown as who pleases husband or tolerates injustice .
Untouchables and peoples of backward section are never shown as a hero .
Some work should be done in this regard .
Reading rooms should be established in rural areas .
Programs of group study or reading should be initiated .
Commercial films related to the development work are very few .
Several films are being making by film division on center and state level but their performance s are still limited to the cities .
More money is spent in the making of films, therefore they should be wide displayed .
The facility to show should be provided at the panchayat level in the rural areas .
Films made on ban of alcohol, gambling, drug, violence, will be more effective for education .
Commercial films should not be screened so they can know crisis of urban life .
Actual pictures or visuals should be given more space in the films .
People see them only in terms of entertainment, change cannot come in their lives through these films .
More production should be done of such kind of films by giving financial assistance to producer of private sector .
Reliability and usefulness will be higher of this type of films .
Picturisation of real incidents can be more effective and result oriented in the conditions of our country .
Entertainment should also be factual, then only it could be helpful in social change .
Radio has more impact than films because viewed seems more true then heard .
Radio is a verbal medium of broadcast but unfortunately we considered it as written medium or use like that .
Oral tradition of broadcasting has been in our country .
Sages and saints have disseminated their education to thousands of people .
This broadcast was called Akashvani, means pure speech like a divine speech .
Every sage or saint itself was a powerful transmitter who Infatuated thousands-lacs of the people by his transmission .
People used to come from very far to listen to their speech and give respect each and every word as chant .
We should prove this tradition only .
Radio is not literary medium, this is an art medium .
This is a medium of dialect, not a medium of language .
More imoprtance should be given to artistic presentation than content .
Speaking use to be more interesting than reading and hearing also use to be interesting in same manner .
Who can speak impressively, can only collect audience and disseminate message to the more people .
Unfortunately we have made radio a medium of written literature .
Music and Dram, these two genres should be used more and more .
These should be more exploited in the areas such as answering letters, conversation or compeering .
The style popular in the folk life, should be used with small changes .
This kind of experiment is done in films .
Touch of modernity should be given to these but traditions should not be out rightly resisted .
Religious beliefs are prevalent in the rural areas .
We can adopt them with a little bit of change .
Protection from damage of these arts is also our responsibility .
Films have made live many folk songs, those are almost extinct and have developed a new culture .
Protection of classical music is successfully done by Radio .
Language only is the scene for radio and scene should be produced by language only .
He can imagine war, love dialogue etc. with the program .
If program is beyond his understandin, then he cannot do this work .
More than half of production of the radio programs is done by its audiences rather than radio producer .
Only broadcasting is not enough .
Even today emphasis is only given to `` What has been broadcast? `` here .
No one had concern over this that `` what use has done of this broadcast `` ?
Even audience research reaches to only this limit that the program has reached to how many listeners .
This is not a concern that meaning full listening of that done or not- or what was the effect of that .
May be we do not care of it .
Maximum transistors should reach into villages and they should also appeal to listen to its programs .
Provide advance information about main programs and invite their ideas, read their letters .
Talk, music, plays etc. are use to broadcast on national level from Delhi centre .
More qualitative improvement is needed in this scheme .
This kind of program should be broadcasted on regional level .
People do not listen to children’s ` programs thinking that this is a children’s ` program .
In fact, instead of this kind of categorisation inclusive program should be broadcasted .
Consideration should also be done on traditional ` fixed point chart ` of AIR .
Everyday should not be such complicated that audiences could not keep in memory the programs easily .
This format should be made more easy .
Effort of stuffing all things in this should not be done .
Hardly any topic left from the radio .
But this work should not be done in the form of preaching .
Similarly change should also be done in administrative structure of the office .
Improvement in nature and level of training is most needed .
Starting level artists should be given intensive training in Radio genres .
Intensive study of folk arts is expected and training should also be given on the level of technology .
The training, which is currently given, is more of administrative nature .
We should also do such survey like Doordarshan in the rural areas that what audiences want to hear or what kind of program they are needed .
If more readiness is shown, than definitely success will be achieved in this direction .
One thing should not be forgotten that Radio is a program of speech .
It should be kept close to colloquial language .
This also a reason of less popularity of Hindi programs in the rural areas that language of the programs is inanimate and bookish .
The importance of radio should not be underrated with the advent of television .
Because radio has its own power .
Even today radio is the friend of majority of the community because of lack of literacy .
In the areas of television, one cannot imagine his life in the absence of radio .
Various experiments are happening in this area, so it is difficult to say anything in this regard .
Doordarshan is a effective medium for illiterate people .
Because this community does not believe on anything without seeing that .
But any aim could not be achieved due to effectiveness of the medium until we cannot use it effectively .
This competition is started in advertisements that who can do complete Digambarikaran .
No one has doubt about the power of means of to communication but this power should be used in the construction of the country .
This is needed in today ` s condition that we could develop communal harmony and unity in the country, which is most needed today .
This is a time of test for the power of means of communication .
Producers of the private sector will give their programs on five metro channels of Doordarshan .
Doodarshan will only look after management of the channels .
Quality and reliability of the programs will be increased due to advent of private sector in the broadcast .
In the direction of making broadcasts people oriented help will also be met from providing autonomy to radio and Doordarshan .
Electronic media is most benefited from the successful functioning of satellites .
Transmission facility is now available in an effective manner on national and local levels .
AIR and Doordarshan should make changes in their programs keeping regional realities in mind .
Establishment of the local centers is appreciated efforts in this direction .
Reform oriented efforts should be done in this direction .
There are lack the resources on these centers .
The number of employees is limited.
Efforts should be done in the direction of make these centers impressive .
Several attempts have been made by Doordarshan in the direction of broadcast local programs .
Right now Doordarshan programs is broadcasting in eight regional language .
The technological advances have been made, as much progress is not happened in the creation or presentation of programs .
Powerful medium is available with us but standard of the programs is still not satisfactory .
Usually all used to be organize, structured and with attractive decoration .
Indeed, newspaper office has been occupied two characteristics in itself .
First it functions till a fix time and shuts like general offices .
Usually its timing use to be like other offices from 10 or 11 am to 5 or 6 pm .
The second section remains conscious and alert twenty four seven .
Editorial Department is a part of this alert section .
The format in which news paper comes to us, editorial department prepared it and handover it to printing department for printing .
After getting printed from print department, a distribution department provides facility to make it reach to the readers .
Murder of Rajiv Gandhi happened in Perumbudur closed to Madras around 10.20 midnight .
Its first news-indication reached around 11 o’clock in editorial section of the newspapers .
Generally, morning of the editorial department happened between 9 am to 11 am .
Broadly the work nature of all newspapers use to be same .
Event the time of table cleaning and its rearrangement is different from any other office .
It someone goes to editorial department in the morning, he will feel that such as heavy activities would have been here in the night .
Thus cleaning of this department is not a minor cleaning .
Cleaning is to be such that entire section looks like a blank paper, on which something can be rewritten again .
One of these or all together can do this work .
Generally, newspapers with sound circulation organise this kind of review-meeting everyday and on a fix time .
It’s time use to be from half an hour to one hour .
Some leading newspapers have started appoint some senior journalist for review of publish newspaper .
Discussion happened on the review of appointed journalist in this review meeting .
Meeting of morning review is not limited to review only .
The responsibility of final presentation is use to be on news editor or shift-in-charge .
The real work begins after this meeting .
Material to be published on that day to be different pages starts to be ready .
Broadly material published in newspaper can be divided into four sections .
The people, who do work of content making for newspaper, are called journalist .
Local editor and editor leads this entire of team .
Journalists do their work in shifts .
Work happens in two or three shifts in all newspapers .
This way work use to be from around 11 am to 5-6 o ` clock in the evening .
` News ` gets prepare for largest time in the newspaper .
News from this reporter are received by teleprinter, telegram, telex, fax, phone or post .
Broadly these news can be divided in four sections .
The news is also divided accordingly on new-room or news desk .
Work of selection of news and editorial often begins between 11 am to 1 pm .
Edition of newspaper for circulation in the city use to be the last, which is generally called ` city edition ` .
It gets ready at four in the morning .
One or two o ` clock at night use to be the time for giving last news for this .
It is increased one-two hours during special events .
This also use to be the last time of the editorial work of news room and editorial section .
After this work of newspaper printing and distribution is happen .
News and other publication material use to be sent for composing after editing .
It is a prior preparation of printing .
Nowadays usually typesetting is done on computer in all newspapers .
This process is also done by typo made by zinc .
The person, who does it, called compositor .
Now computer-room has taken place of this .
There are three main types of computer typesetting .
First two kinds are found in most of the newspapers .
Now ` paster ` use to do embed or design the typeset material .
Material designed in this way use to send for next process of printing .
Printing of newspaper begins only after their consent .
Generally all leading newspaper use to publish more than one edition .
Planning of these editions is done on the basis of expansion of coverage area and their distance from location of publication .
Usually, newspapers use to be distributed around 6 am in the morning at all location .
Other amendments and directives related to decoration are also depicted in it .
People who do decoration and incharge of decoration decorate pages of newspaper according to these directives .
Any negligence in any level in this work only brings disapproval of readers on next day .
Several times one news gets repeated or one day old news gets published .
This is the result of carelessness in this work .
Indeed, any newspaper is known for name and work of editorial department .
Conscious, alert and effective class of the society has aspirations to establish ties with this department .
Responsibility of doing these for works remains on editor/local editor and deputy editors .
The person who work between deputy-editor and editor, they are also not only name of the posts .
They also work under a work plan .
Editor is the main administrative officer and legal officer of the editorial department .
He use to be responsible for published material in the newspaper .
He only decides that what should be published and what should not be published .
Newspaper ` s content can be divided into two parts .
The editor use to be the head of both departments .
Editor of the newspaper use to be the window of management and administration for editorial department .
He should make such material and image of the newspaper thereby help could be found to achieve these goals .
Time and again he should watch that the newspaper is continuously progressing or not?
Progress of the newspaper depends on its readers .
Management of both of these departments is not a responsibility of editorial department .
Editor is the supreme-contact officer for reader and sources of publication material .
On being any one unit excellent, the whole paper does not become good .
Only its excellence in totality takes it on the top of progress .
As a result, the newspaper could not satisfy his readers.
The leader of this work group or team or captain use to be the editor .
He should be their friend, assistant, guide, one who understand their feelings and one who can make them work knowing their problems .
In last two-three decades editor has became a post of decoration in many newspapers .
He use not be an executive there .
This the post like ` executive editor ` in English newspapers .
It has being regarded that news and idea are two separate genres for which different skills and interest is necessary .
Along with, he guides the work of daily routine of news section .
They fulfill the responsibility given by the editor .
Generally, editorial comment and main article use to be similar in these .
Local editor also writes editorial and lead articles in NBT .
Readers view and other material use to do select and edit at local level .
In this kind of newspapers local editors bears all remaining responsibility other than writing editorial commentary .
He is also called deputy editor .
As per the condition of newspaper editor, one or more than one assistant editors bear responsibility of editorial section .
According to the responsibility of work, post of the assistant editor is given to any experiences and senior journalist .
He must be skilled writter and well read .
Only if he has command on the language, he can effectively edit article and feature etc .
News are the soul of newspapers .
Its effective edition and presentation is necessary for the progress of newspaper .
Entire this work use to happen in the leadership of news editor .
Only he coordinates this whole work .
Thus, this is called ` back bone ` of the newspaper .
He nominates they duty of deputy-editors or be helpful in nomination .
Only he use to be responsible for editions of the newspapers .
Only he is inquired on every point related to the news and only he is responsible of that .
He investigates the news of city, commerce, sports and coverage area .
He also communicates with reporters .
In charge editor of news service do this work in some newspaper .
This is a duty of main deputy editor to lead news related shift of editorial department in the newspaper .
He is responsible for design of pages, pictures, cartoon and selection of other graphics .
He also prepares their title and introduction .
He decides main news (lead) for newspaper with the advice of news editor .
He keeps an eye on standard style use of news and standard page- design .
Deputy Editor is the first step of editorial department .
Only deputy editors supply the maximum material in the newspaper .
Image of the newspaper depends only on their skill and ability .
They checks the facts and statements contained in the news .
They use to correct language related mistakes in the news and remove mistakes of repetition etc .
For example, news in Marathi language or written in Marathi script is received in Hindi newspaper in Maharashtra .
Deputy Editor presents them according to the spelling after correction or translating into Hindi .
For example, murder of Rajiv Gandhi happened on 10.20 hrs in the night of 21st may, 1991 .
News of this incident had being coming gradually throughout the night .
Erstwhile narrated fact in this gradually changed and improved .
Deputy Editor would have done repetitive correction while editing this news .
News could have become misleading without this kind of caution .
In such situation there was enough difference between news given on 7 hrs in the evening and news given on 2 hrs in the night .
Correspondents use to do work of collection of news for the newspaper .
They are also called ` reporter ` .
Apart from these correspondents are also appointed for news of sports, business, arts, culture etc .
Therefore this is expected that deputy-editor should know work of correspondent and every correspondent should know about editing .
He should be aware of collection of all kinds of news as a correspondent .
He should this information that what are the sources of news and where, how is the continuity or possibility of the news or events .
His language skill should be good and form of his expression should be good .
Sections use to distribute among the correspondents for collection of the news .
This is called beat or ` Karya Kshetra ` .
For example crime, district administration, hospital or heath service etc .
Generally, collection of political, administrative or other special kinds of news gets done by experienced journalists .
Such experienced reporters are appointed as special reporters .
Leadership of the team of local editors also use to given to special reporter .
In such situation he is called main correspondent .
In this way he coordinates complete work of news collection and plans it .
He inspects works of the correspondents and decides responsibility of correspondent for following news .
Special correspondent is also use to be public relation officer of the newspaper .
In this way work of copy editor is very important in the newspaper .
He bears the responsibility of no mistakes, repetition, misleading facts etc remain in newspaper .
Editorial department is also a room of provocation of creative writing and mental imagination .
Presence of means of entertainment is most necessary for concentration at such place .
Seating arrangement and systemic light system should be enough and according to work .
The atmosphere should be positive there .
Necessary things and tools for work and person should be close and of good condition there .
This place should be such, where no situation of hindrance or dis-interest of work should be there .
Usually size of this desk use to be of ‘U’ character of English .
News editor or shift in charge use to sit at one end of it .
Team of deputy editors sits both sides in front of news editor .
This meeting is also different from news desk or correspondents meeting .
Facility of placing material and their take care should be on their seat .
Atmosphere of editorial department should be positive according to the various reasons .
Mind will not be concentrated on the work, if atmosphere will be hot in summer and cold in winter .
Similarly, that place should be of enough light, ventilation and clean .
Stench or spread trash or garbage incapable in given freshness in mental work.
Similar things should be kept in mind about colour-planning and other decoration of the wall of editorial room .
Apart from these, writing paper, pin, dust bin, intercom etc. should be putted on every seat .
Necessary phone facility for inner and outer contact should be available on these desks .
Along with this, system of constant and easy relation of reference section with editorial section should be established .
Similarly ash trays also, so papers could be prevented from the risk of fire .
Toilet and place of drinking water of this department should also be separated and special care should be kept of cleaning .
This can only happen when working hours are extended .
Generally, distribution of newspaper is done in the morning .
There are newspapers that distributed in the evening, but most of the newspaper use to be distributed in the morning .
This circulation happens at similar time all around their coverage area .
However, for distribution in Delhi, its printing will start on 2-3 hrs in the night .
Same can be understood for other places .
Therefore, coordination of work of editorial department is necessary with this system of printing .
Similar work division use to be between assistant editors and main deputy editors .
Generally, work of editorial department goes on continue from 11 hrs in the morning to 3 hrs in the night in the newspaper .
In this way, work of almost 16 hours use to be divided into two or three shifts .
Works other than news are done from 11 hrs to 5 or 6 hrs in the day .
Generally three shifts use to be there for news related work .
Business news are usually received by 9 pm .
Sports news, from the country are received by 9 pm or from the world by mid night or after that .
News of tele-printer use to come from 10 hrs in the morning to 2-3 hrs in the mid night .
So, work division is done in a manner that one to two work hours should be together .
Generally this is considered that incoming of the news is faster from 7 hrs in the evening to 11 hrs in the night .
This is the time when generally first, second editions use to do prepare for printing .
News is in fact curiosity of the human being .
Her this curousity cannot be tied to any fix block .
Therefore what is news, this also can be told tying in any definition .
According to Dr. Shyam Singh ` Shashi ` newspaper is not a bundle of paper or ink, but bunch of news .
According to journalist Nandkishor Trikha news should be always new, interesting, entertaining and important .
These two are the perspectives of news .
Pioneer of editors Ambika Prasad Vajpeyee considered that every incident is not news .
The incident which has more or less public importance can only become news .
Ramchandra Varma has also expressed similar opinion .
They say, `` whichever talk tells editor, is the news.”
In the opinion of William L. Rivers `` Whom good editor want to publish, is the news.”
According to Silldar, peoples in enough number want to know, that is the news .
The condition is this that (such news) should not violet rules of good taste and prestige .
Prof. William J Blair believes that the contemporary thing in which many people are interested is the news .
The best news is that in which majority of the readers are interested .
Apart from the interest of the people some other facts are also there who becomes news such as consumer approach, extra-ordinarily, works of the leaders of the society .
According to William L. River `` the contemporary report of the incidents, facts and ideas, in which several people have interest, is the news .
Prof. Christian Busch believes that generally news is the provocative information thereby any person gets satisfaction or provocation .
According to Bulsase and Campbell `` news is such details of any present idea, incident or controversy, which attracts consumers .”
North Cliff has said this that news is a thing of beyond ordinary .
This is a belief that we live in the society or nation-state, whatever its administrator, leader says and does, is also a news .
Activities of the issues, those affect us such as economic, political, criminal, law, geography etc. are news .
Meaning of saying that news cannot be limited to any one analysis or definition .
Because that is related to the interest of human being and his curiousity .
The dispersion of interest or curiosity of human being, similar is the coverage area of news .
In this sense, everything could be news, provided that cannot produce disinterest .
One contradiction is also there in this regard .
As everything can be news, similarly there is no such news, in which everyone has equal interest .
So the excellent news would be that, in which maximum people are maximum interested .
That person gave his own bus tickets to the meat seller .
Meat seller wrapped meat of 2 rupees in that .
But when he reached home, he saw that the meat has fallen by slipping through the whole made by bus conductor .
Saint meeting of Hindu religious saint gave deadline of 18th November to the government .
It is told to the government that it should remove all possible hurdles in the making of Ram Mandir till then .
Two male-vampires made a 13 year old girl victim of lust in New Kabadkhana .
They hit her when she shouted .
Both the accused ran away because of few people came there on listening to sound of shouting .
Today Pinatubo Volcano Mountain exploded with a powerful blast which was activated in the starting of the week .
The cyclonic cloud of ash and smoke from the mouth of the volcano raised 75,000 feet high in the sky and molten lava flowing in the rivers on mountain slopes.
The news which are close to his interests, he reads completely only those .
He only looks or cursorily reads the remaining materials .
Interests of farmers of the villages, mill workers, administrative servicer of the cities or political activities use not be similar .
And background of age, study, moral value etc. also creates many differences .
It can be said in a sense that every person has its special interest .
Similarly this could also be said that few such incidents also happen, in which all have interest .
On selection of Mr. Narshimharao as a leader, people were curious that who will be taken in the ministry .
Again curiosity emerges that who will be given which department .
Generally, human being is selfish .
He likes that material or information, which is useful of beneficial for him .
His interest reflects in all parts of his life .
The information, investigation and developed process attract people, which are extraordinary and innovative .
First information of Test-Tube-Baby, information of use of laser beam or computer was the such information .
A news published on 22 July, in which it is revealed that in Ahmadabad, a woman gave birth to a baby, which fetus has not developed in the womb, but developed in the abdomen .
Society, person and earth are not immovable .
It is dynamic .
Change is taking place every moment in it .
Similarly change is also happening in the work of person or society .
Similar condition is of news related to incidents, persons etc .
Tamils of the south India or Indian of all over the country affected by attacked on native Tamil people in Shrilanka .
In Fizi, the government took action on the people of Indian origin, its reaction also occurred in India .
Punishable action on Hindu temples and Hindus in Pakistan affects in India .
Such news are more liked, in which struggle or courage is expressed .
News of mutual factionalism of leaders of political parties, accusations against each-other are of these kinds .
Mind stimulates by the in formations of courage, speed, struggle etc., which converts into conflict or satisfaction .
Contradictions and satisfaction give joy to the nature of human being .
Reader wants newness or freshness in the news .
He was keen to know how much fare increased, on rail fair increases in rail budget .
Small or big size of the news also attracts reader ` s attention .
Similarly, news of murder of Rajiv Gandhi was also of importance of big size .
Such difference in the importance occurs due to base of readers section etc .
These news can be edited with this carefree that no changes will be in them .
Till the time when all section is not received in those, the news will be uncompleted .
Continue or ` more ` is also written in such news .
` Antim ` word is mentioned with news title in the starting of concluding part .
News of the activities of militants in Punjab often received three times day, evening and night .
Changes occur in day and night in the news of riots or nuisances, floods or weather .
Number of people killed in November in Ayodhya during Karseva on first day and second day was different .
We have read several news of flood or accidents, in which number of dead has changed .
Similarly, change has been happening in other particulars .
In editing of such news, it is necessary to update them with including these changes .
Expansion and diversity use to be in details of such news and their impact, results and responses are kept with the news .
These correspondents are in full term service as other journalists of the editorial department of newspaper .
Newspaper also appoints correspondents at main locations including capital of country and states .
On such locations this responsibility is given to experienced journalists .
Generally these correspondents are not like journalists who are working in the service of newspaper .
They are given fix or honourarium based on the size of the news for their work .
Prestige of the newspaper in coverage area and circulation depend on the news of these correspondents .
To an extent, these reporters also determine progress of the newspaper .
So, a newspaper gives priority to their news .
Leading business establishments, institutions also provide news to newspaper of their activities by preparing news .
This mode of news is considered the authentic however there is a plethora of self-promotion .
News are often published on the decided pages only in these .
On these pages, space use to be reserve for to be published advertisement on that day .
Thus, selection of the news and their editing is done while keeping available space in the mind .
So, usually news with less importance received during day time .
In the evening news is received form all modes like torrential rains .
Means of news receiving are tele printer, telex, fax, telephone or telegraph etc .
Seasonal or mistakes of any other kind can be occur in these means .
In such situation preparation of alternative is essential otherwise you can remain lagging behind in time and in competition .
Along with, this effort should also made that malfunction of the equipments expire soon .
Safety and timely editing of such news is not possible without continuous efforts .
Correct editing of the news could be on time, for this enough deputy editors are necessary .
On the time of special news incidents, special assistant and special materials should be managed .
Brief comments on budget are also got prepared on that day .
This also is so because in many newspapers reference room is not remains open till late night .
If the incompleteness remains in that material, possibility of mistakes remains there .
Time of printing of newspaper remains fixed .
In similar order time is fixed for pre-printing activities (plate, camera, pasting) .
Disturb in their time is considered disturb in the timely publication of newspaper .
Sense of news is a situation of experience .
Exact similar to becoming new of curd after being melted .
Similarly news sense is a new form of new-editing .
Thus this is said that selection of the news is a difficult work .
This the same feat, as a person passes through a small circle .
It is already told about these, but know again for memory .
Factors of attraction make news the ‘news’ .
The process of selection of news does not end here only .
Base of selection is the readership of newspaper .
Giving news according to readers and preparing readership through news, this is interdependency .
In selection and editing of news follow-up news are very important .
Selection of large or widespread news should be done at the first instance .
Neglecting these news is a blow to the prestige of the newspaper .
Among these all, such impression should not become that only extra-ordinary or big person become news .
Such incidents also take place in these also, which reflects other part of the story .
Off course this section is in minority in the news, but this should not also be neglected while news selection .
Often focus on one element is reduced while selection of the stories .
Generally more news use to be of ideological excitement, conflict, compassion or malice .
Many times news seems an advertisement or creative or news of development give sing of government praise .
Similar uncertainty persists also about foreign news .
Such contexts, persons or events also create the same dilemma .
Those cannot be neglected because of competition and the public interest .
Even then, it will not be correct to give form of spreading rumours to news .
Along with it is also published that such rumours were also spread last year in Jabalpur .
The news, those are not eligible to publish, immediately put them in the waste basket .
The readiness in which this work will be done, editing work will be carried on with same readiness .
Deputy Editor, who has interest in music, will make news related to Pt. Ravishankar with more interest .
Similarly, Deputy Editor interested in literature could be prevented from writing ` Dhandha Yug ` instead of ` Andhayug ` a play by Dharmvir Bharati .
Therefore editing is simplest and along with harder work .
It is so simplest that any one new can do it on seeing one or two times .
It is such difficult that it takes to learn the editing .
It is also mechanical and also with the possibility of original creating process .
This is a skill, art but along with creation of new thing .
With the extension of coloumn type size of the title use to be different from general news .
Such presentation of intro or title is giving importance to news with both kinds word and approach .
Title is soul of the news .
Title of the news of murder of Rajiv Gandhi and Smt Gandhi are example of these .
A particular style use to be of news of news agencies, understanding of it helps in news editing .
Currently only ` PTI ` , ` Bhasha ` , ` UNI ` , ` Varta ` are the main news service .
In these ` Bhasha ` related with ` PTI ` and ‘VARTA’ related with ` UNI ` are news agencies of Hindi and English .
Below news number Shirsh-Sanket (Slug) use to be giving indication of the news .
If news is in more than one parts, then ` one ` , ` two ` is written with this Shirsh-Sanket .
Now, a title of one line use to be after Shirsh Sanket in English news of Press Trust .
This is a new trend in practice .
This custom has not yet practiced in Hindi .
After this, news starts with the place, date, sign of news agency .
Important news do come in more than one parts, but along with this they are also sent after editing them more than one time .
Many times modified news is also given after modification .
Almost similar happens with few of those news, in which mistakes of facts or details are there .
Many time news agencies release directive of cancel its own earlier sent news .
Sometime this also happens in such contexts that amended news is given by canceling any particular news on its place .
Generally, name of the place and date of the news mentioned with the news .
This called date-line in English .
Time of incident, context is easily told by this .
Readers also feel by this that he is reading fresh news .
Generally, all newspapers adopt this tradition .
In some newspapers day is being mentioned instead of date .
` Navbharat ` , ` Independent ` do not mentioned either day or date .
Language expresses fact and contents in the news .
To say language is a set of words according to grammar, but the same set makes content interesting or dull, interesting or boring .
Many times we do not realise while reading news that what is being said?
Even now, tradition of translation into Hindi from English is continuing .
Flow of text and need of impact skill also underlines in interpretation .
News are also received from news agency, city representative and correspondents .
Variation of language and spelling remains in those .
Soviet president Mikhail Gorbachev said to night that the operation to overthrow him has failed and he has resumed his complete control over the country ` s situation .
Mr. Gorbachev said in a massage on a prime news telecast ` Vemya ` (time) that he will resume his duty within 24 hours .
Syntax should be according to the grammar .
Poetic or untraditional sentences should be created only for feeling or attitude in title or box of the news .
While doing this must ensure that meaning and flow is not get disturbed .
News should be written in an order after preparing in the mind .
While doing this imagine that you are telling news to a person who is sitting in front of you .
Writing will be natural by this .
Whatever want to say, has been written, check this .
Dont add other texts in first text there only and dont let be contradictory .
Correspondents either of newspaper of news-agency, many times do not or cannot check the facts .
They considered that facts will be checked while editing .
In such condition editing of news also will be mechanical, means whatever is written, is kept till correction of word, spelling etc. mistake will be printed in newspaper .
News with such mistake will ruin prestige of that newspaper .
Even though many times reader accepts wrong information as considering them as correct information .
He has to face its result at job, service or in meetings or has to face taunts from friends .
Possibility of such types of mistakes, published in newspaper, in other publication also remains there .
In fact news is a summary of complete story .
While articles are detail analysis of the context .
Therefore it could be said that every news, no matter how big, is only a summary of the full story .
Summary does not mean that only one main fact should be kept of it .
The context is being told, its all parts should be told in such way, therefore it could be written in small size .
Building of local college is in very shabby condition .
If administration didn ` t pay attention on time, probability of accident cannot be ruled out .
Students have demanded construcion of new building from education minister .
College is taking place here in old royal palace from the beginning .
One fourth part of the royal palace has been damaged .
Classes of Science, Arts and Commerce are organised in remaining five rooms .
It reveals that lecturer of English posted here is also attached at MVM Bhopal .
His salary is drawn from here only .
Some fix symbols are used for word correction and removing grammatical mistakes while preparing press copy of news and other material .
This signs are generally used in all sectors for editing and compositor or operator who compose or type set, understand these .
Because of these symbols full instructions are not written .
Generally all good news are result of editing skill, but in special news editing skills gets tested .
Generally maximum readers have largest interest in special news, therefore deputy editor or main deputy editor should exercise special caution and vigilance while editing these .
Mistakes happened in such news or demerits come easily in the notice of the reader .
Because of such mistakes and demerits readers begin dislike the newspaper .
Editing of news of the speeches of leaders and academicians generally do not be without mistakes .
In these news, fact of pro-readers is found most neglected .
Generally news of speeches of ministers or leaders are published with more priority .
Though generally readers are found with less reading of such news .
In editing of speeches of scholars many time their opinion use to be of one-two lines only on indication of subject of subject .
Aim of the speech is also different .
Often chief delivers such speech .
Few use to be context-speeches, few speeches are related to the relevance of debate, problem or expectation that time .
Consistency and flow should be in the presentation of the statement and subject and flow .
The text of the speech should only be presented as a statement of the speaker .
Statement should be divided in small sections and coherent relationship should be in that .
Country fought a long war for creation of exploitation free society while breaking the chains of slavery .
While saying this today, I am satisfied that in Madhya Pradesh, caste or class struggle is not reflected in distorted form .
Madhya Pradesh is insulated from curses such as castes and their organisation, their armies, fatal attack on each-other, arson .
Most controversies are related with land or personal conflicts .
We have tried it in the past one and half year that such environment should be created in which these classes may not be oppressed .
Notion of our government is this that the most important requires for prevention of oppression on these classes is a alert and sensitive administration .
My government has taken step in the direction of preventing such situations, which were resulted in untoward incidents .
The measures I have mentioned here, their effects did occur and in comparative terms, conditions have improved in the case of atrocities .
But we do not consider this enough satisfactory .
We want to see that time soon when injustice and atrocities against weaker sections will be finished completely .
This is my clear view that legal solutions are helpful till a limit .
There are some basic steps we have taken to resolve the problem with far-reaching consequences .
I am happy that to implementing these two programs all state government departments are working in full swing .
On thirteen of such program, plans to spend Rs 50 crore has been earmarked .
Till now with the loan and grant of 20 crores rupees more than 28 thousand people have got chance to become self-reliant .
For further rapid progress in this direction we have launched an innovative program from 25th of last month .
This program directly linked with the interests of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes is named as Deendayal Antyodaya Karykram .
This program is being implemented with public participation at all levels .
Government has made widespread efforts to provide a respected place to Scheduled Castes in the society .
To meet basic demand like education, apart from the schools, hostel and ashram have been opened in large numbers .
Many problems are related with oppression on Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes .
Implementation of this movement more broadly and rapidly in rural areas is a need .
I hope, in today ` s this conference, decisions will be taken after discussion in this context .
To implementation of the Protection of Citizens ` Rights Act, four special functioning courts are working in the State .
He said that state is paying full attention on expansion of education in these classes .
Prime Minister Mr. P. V. Narsimharao inaugurated this conference of Chief Ministers .
His speech was main .
Therefore Mr. Patwa ` s speech has remained in fairly small in size after editing in newspaper at the time of publication .
Mr. Patva clears that many problems are related to the oppression on Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes .
Both subject and speaker are important for the news of seminar, symposium, discussion, debate etc .
And often seminar is organised on contemporary issues .
Thus its results are important .
Education secretary I. C. Shrivastava said that senior peoples of the education sectors selflessly should come forward with their experience for preparing such schemes which are practical .
Former education secretary Dr. Tara Prakash Joshi put the idea of a separate curriculum for each village .
He also talked on formation of a great alliance of volunteer organisations for rural development oriented education .
Senior journalist and teachers ` leader Bishansingh Shekhawat said that feeling of just being a civil servant of teachers is became a problem in rural development .
This is the reason that there is a shortage of teachers in rural schools .
Organisation of the seminar was done under ` Shabd Nivesh ` jointly by All India Radio and Rashtriya Manav Sangrahalaya, Bhopal .
Today was the second day of the event .
Mr. Kamaleshwar said that literature makes correlation between present context and time and gives courage to live .
We are okay with thoughts, it is possible only on the basis of heritage .
But he said in the tone of disappointment that in such environment literature will able to do something, it is not seemingly .
Dr. Prabhakar Shrotiya put his words while attacking lobbying and politics spread in literary world .
He said that similar to other sectors a underworld is born in the literature also, which has done big crimes .
Dr. Shrotriy said that literature became poor and small by this .
He said that if trend of looking at words in cover will be continuoues, we will never see the truth .
Mr. Pal told to writers that they should create such tone in their literature, its life remains by this .
He emphasised on creation of lived experienced .
Famous critics of Urdu literature and fiction writer Mr. Mohammad Shamim said that literature should do encounter with truth .
He said that in the existing environment only literature related to reality can play a meaningful role .
He said that nowadays writers do not have courage of telling truth and till the time this courage is not take place in them, they cannot play any constructive role .
All Hindi newspapers published prominently the news of demise of Sharad Joshi .
Many newspapers also commented on his writing, achievements etc with the news of death .
Almost all newspapers have added those parts in his available biography, which were prepared in editorial department .
Its apart from the details and activities etc. of the murder .
Such incidents should also be followed consistently .
Nearly 100 years ago, the title of the news used to be small in size .
Many time text of the news used not be advertised by this .
Nor it was presented with main attraction, that looking them attention goes towards the news .
Seeking attention is now considered a virtue of the title .
Headline is the crown of news .
It began to be acknowledged as the journalistic skills of deputy editor .
The title is no longer limited at just the content indicator .
Their arts-sense has reached at psychology of readers .
While editing of the news deputy editor to news editor all could be seen with cutting-pasting of news .
Search of good title always remains for every news .
But now titles of the main news begin to be sold .
Beautification of the newspaper is relatively new trend .
The desing, with nowadays presented.
Such efforts are made that even banner title of the lead news also goes with special attraction .
Now you would like to know that what is ` promo ` or ` coming up ` in TV news?
When any small story is shown by making for propagation of some special program and told this program will be shown on this particular time, that is ‘promo’ .
