You people do not know Tarneja?
When did you come back from America? You took so many days this time?
Oh Yes-Yes , such was the nature of work of the drainage system of that place , You know I used to study the gutter system.
Great! America is so wonderful, the drinking water and the gutter water is separate there.
We lag behind , we should do something but we are helpless.
America is very different sir, we are behind them in terms of gutter and below them in terms of buildings.
Sir,they have 100 storeyed buildings there.
Of course, I saw that.
Yes I remember, the government has announced that the buildings that will be build in the slum area shall be allowed more..
Yes , they shall be allowed to build more localities and buildings and we are not being permitted 24-25.
Taeneja!What happened to the flyover at Mahim?
It has been three years. When will it finish?
It will be over very soon Dinello!But I should only get the contracts of other bridges.
Let us sit and talk. Come over to my beach house.
Yes, I remember an important thing.
What rubbish news is this `` khabardar `` magazine publishing about us?
It has even published that I take bribe from you.
How does it know about our confidential things?
Don ` t be scared Dinello, insects like ` Khabardar ` keep buzzing, I shall treat them.
How did they both come inside? Were you sleeping?
No, I was watching them.
Have you completed the Beauty photo studio ` s work?
That is under process, Madam.
Under Process? What is happening?
You cannot do anything, I will have to go myself.
I will go and see whether they are worthy of our assignments and trust or not?
Do you know who am I? I am the editor of ` Khabardar ` .
Hey, where is Sudheer? A customer has come.
Gudmorning & Welcome! Vinod,the fifty percent owner of the Beautiful photo studio warmly welcomes you.
And promises to click a gorgeous and unequaled photo of you , seeing which all the men of the world will sit holding their hearts.
Being a professional photographer I can look into your eyes and see what is there inside your heart- Dream of becoming a model.
Only one person can make it a reality and he is....
Sudheer! Where were you? A customer had come.
And look at her , when she had first come to your shop , she wore veil , and now see.
I will be much ahead of her.
Can you see the tender that Tarneja has given to the commissioner.
I need his photographs at any cost.
Shobha jee what are you saying?
I am right, think of some idea.
Shobha jee! What are you saying , there are four men sitting inside , I can ` t think of clicking a photograph , it is even difficult to get inside.
And did you see the pistol? Others must have been possessing it.
Ahuja! You drink a lot. How will you listen to my talks if you drink?
I drink from mouth, not from ears. Talk about the new scandal.
Actually, four new flyovers of municipal corporation are to be made, many tenders have come,your ` s, Tarneja ` s. I saw your tender.It is good.
So what it is good. I will not get it. You like only one person.
Mister Dinello! I can give you double the money of what Tarneja is being offered.
Alright then. You get the contract of four bridges.
You are feeding my cake to my enemy in front of me only?
Mister Vinod Chauhan! Keep it very clear in your mind that we have a professional relationship and not of a master and servant. Do you understand?
Now stand up and listen what next you have to do.
Yes, What do I need to do?
You have to secretly get inside Tarneja ` s bunglow , there is supposed to be an agreement on the bridges between him and Ahuja.
See, being a servant I shall also tell you that we are here to click photographs not to be clicked.
Tarneja must have clicked it that day through pistol.
The master has nothing to loss , after all you have no feelings . We have it , but sorry master! this Tarneja business is very dangerous.
So you will not go?
No ,we will definitely not go.
You ` ll starve to death.
We are already dieing with starvation.
You did not see it now, I had fallen down because of weakness.
You do not even give sufficient money to eat. I cannot do this risky work master.
Can you understand it? Really?
I swear it on your name Shobha.
So you ` ll go to Tarneja ` s bunglow?
What are you thinking?
I am thinking whether I really understand you or I am trying to understand you.
I guess I am trying.
I know, I am alone in this crowded world, nobody is with me.
Hey, I am with you.
Don ` t touch me. Who am I to you?
I have no possession on you.
Because you suspect that I am entrapping you.
You spoilt my work.
You snatched the contract of four bridges that I was supposed to get.
Buddy! Actually I have the facility to make the bridge.
Why not we work together , You make two bridges and I shall make the other two.
Sir, Shall I say something if you don ` t mind?
This is Ashok speaking.
Speak slowly . Don ` t shout. Is there anybody around you?
No-No. Nobody is there.
Are all the doors and windows shut?
You are such a substandard person.
Listen to me carefully, It is very secret.
I want to speak something about Shobha,the editor of ` Khabardar ` .
She has taken photographs of your tender.
You will become dumb by listening to the thing that I am going to speak now.
I am screaming since long. You people do not even listen.
I want to talk something important to you.
None of you are getting the contract of the bridges that you are fighting over.
What do you want to say?
The commissioner has made a fool of us, he has given all these contracts to some third person.
What? How can this happen?
He has taken bribe from me.
Sir, he has also taken bribe from us but this is absolutely true.
How did you know?
Sir, the assistant commissioner himself told me.
Wow, Vinod! What do you think about this?
Alright, it is quite beautiful but not a prize winning thing.
If you send this to the competition, they will drive you away.
Look at my photograph according to the human feelings.
How do you find your photograph that is visible in the mirror.
See. Isn ` t there your reflection?
Who is this idiot that has come?
It is not me.
I am very happy commissioner Srivastava that you have come to inaugurate this bridge.
We are glad that today the bridge, Dimello is being inaugurated.
This bridge is the fruit of the hard work of thousands of people and its construction is a very big step in the development of Mumbai city.
This bridge is the symbol of our hard work, perseverance and unity.
And yes, it is not just a bridge but the dream of lakhs of people of this city.
It is not for an individual but for the entire society, whether someone has Mercedes, or is a costermonger: a industrialist, or a vegetable vendor; whether a leader of this country or peon.
And many poor people shall one day build their homes beneath this bridge.
It is a matter of grief that the person who is actually the pillar of this bridge is not with us anymore.
It is said that every success has some sin associated with it. You are at the peak of success, what do you have to say?
No, What bookish things are you saying?
Success only needs hard work and honesty.
Your labor also works very hard Mr. Tarneja! He is left to survive in the hell.
What did you do ten years back- An ordinary contractor.
Brother! You press people are jealous of anybody ` s success.
Brain, perseverance and ideals are required to rise high.
Our work is to expose the hidden filth associated with these ideals.
Why do you see everything with suspicion?
You have to forget all the little talks and problems of everyday life and who doesn ` t want to rise high?
But Mr. Tarneja is rising very high.
Now nobody can save him, not at any cost, What was the need to open his mouth?
Our dead bodies shall be found in the parks and behind the trees in the bushes.
Sudheer! Whatever I do, I do it deliberately. Do you understand?
Whether I am the elder or not?
Yes, Yes you are a big careless person.
You know what was lying there at the flyover?
This is ` Khabardar ` s editor Shobha speaking.
I don ` t have time for useless interviews.
No, No, Don ` t disconnect the call Mr. Tarneja, else you will regret.
I want to talk to you about commissioner Dimello.
It has been very long he has passed away.
He has passed away or has been killed?
I can prove that he has been murdered and also that you have committed this crime.
What rubbish are you talking?
Right now, I have that photograph where you are clearly seen firing the bullet at Mr. Dimello.
Mr.Tarneja! What do you think, what is the reason behind the downfall of this bridge?
The inquiry committee will tell the reasons, but yes, I have not left any scope.
I have used the best cement, imported cement and imported materials.
I have the faith that the chairman of the inquiry committee shall definitely reach an outcome.
If my materials were faulty then many buildings of Mumbai must have fallen by this time.
Who can question you, but still question?
You yourself know the answer my friend, think.
Yes, this bridge has not fallen but made to fall.
It is a conspiracy, somebody wants to defame me.
Tarneja is caught now, it is impossible for him to be free from my grips.
Now Ahuja is also with me, both of us will together destroy him.
You people are also with me?
Shobha Jee! You need not ask this.
We will give you full support in teaching a lesson to that Tarneja.
See Sudheer! Didn ` t I tell you that truth always wins and the evil loses.
Listen, I shall not wait more, I shall publish this issue right now.
That Tarneja is fooling people and that bald Srivastava is supporting him.
Ahuja , how did the bridge collapse then?
Shobha jee! We mix sand in cement and he mixes cement in sand , the bridge had to collapse.
But Ahuja, Tarneja will somehow escape, he has big sources.
He will make the authorities believe that the bridge has collapsed due to some sabotage.
How can he make them believe this? There has not been any explosion neither any destruction.
Shobha Jee sand ` s bridge had to collapse .
I crossed that bridge last night , the bridge was unharmed that time , in fact I also offered lift to a person.
Whom did you offer a lift? That person can also become a witness.
I do not know who that idiot was.
Hey, its good that I locked the car, now nobody can go from here.
Tell me where have you kept the dead body?
Did you see the dead body is not there.
It is not the time to walk slow.
Oh shit! Ahuja has locked the car.
We cannot escape, they must have been searching us.
We must send this dead body to the police station soon.
Wow , Shakuni mama! You have thrown the dice so well. We won the entire kingdom of the Pandavas.
Now whom will you put at stake Yudhishthir?
Take one more move Dharmaraj and take back your entire kingdom. Do you have the courage?
Put all the Pandavas at stake if you have the courage.
I accept.
Yudhisthir! You put your four brothers and yourself at stake and you lost , now Draupadi is left.Do you accept?
Elder brother! Pandavas lost their entire kingdom in gamble. What will they put on stake now?
We have won that Draupadi whom the Pandavas had won before.
Draupadi did not remain queen anymore, she is now my maid.
What is happening son Duryodhan! Don ` t offend the honor of Draupadi.
Father! She had only laughed at me one day when I fell into the water, She declared me as a blind being a blind ` s son.
Duhshashan! Step forward, unclothe her and make her sit on my thighs.
We can never breach the honor of Draupadi. We don ` t have that fire to make her nude.
Hey, what has happened to Dubey ` s face?
I can never do anything against Draupadi. Hats off to such an honorable lady.
Uncover your eyes and see what is there in this sacred Aryan lady.Hats off to such an honorable lady.
Brother! What are you doing?
Alright, let me unclothe her.
No. Listen to me. Come here.
Yes Dusshashan! Did you understand what I said?
Yes, You are absolutely correct brother! I have done a mistake, the unclothing of Darupadi bhabhi (sister in law) cannot take place.
Alright Pandava brother! Go back to your home.
We will send back Draupadi bhabi(sister in law) to you after dinner.
Draupadi is not only yours. We all are share holders.
But we have to obey the elder brother.
This is how it is written in the play.
I have never even obeyed my father ` s order. You are nothing.
Be careful Bheem! You are insulting the elder brother in front of everybody in the court.
Just shut up Arjun singh.
What is happening?
Hey Arjun! Its your insult.
If this donkey carries bludgeon then you also carry bow.
S.K.! It was very essential for this terrorist to remain alive, I had also told you.
Yes Sir, But I am not responsible for that.
He has committed suicide, nobody has killed him.
S.K., he was under your charge.
Look, death becomes easy when the body crosses a certain level of pain, the terror of death escapes and the culprit is not allowed to cross that limit.
I am sorry sir, I woke you up at the mid night.
At what time did he commit suicide?
During evening, when the prisoners come out.
When did you come to know about this?
At eight o ` clock when the I found the cell empty.
Was the cell open?
What are doing boys? Is this the place to play?
Don ` t play with the ball of stone. You will hurt yourself.
Grand mother! We were ten years old since when you are objecting Jaswant.
He has not learnt yet.
Even you have not not understood.
I have understood. Hold this stick and teach him.
I shall beat him and you shall feel the pain, as if I do not know you both.
I have heard that you have sheltered a terrorist at your house.
Terrorist? Which terrorist are you talking about?
What is your name?
Kripal, how are you related to him?
Sir, he is my sister ` s fiance.
How many person ` s are there at your home? I mean your family members.
All these people that are out or is there anyone else who is also inside?
There must be servants? Is there a guest at your house these days?
Why are you asking them Vora? Talk to me.
I have come from Bhemri, Sir.
The police took away my brother , they said that they will release him in half an hour but it has been three hours and there is no news from him.
What did he do?
Nothing Sahib , Police came to our house searching a terrorist named Jimmy.
Did he hid himself at your house?
We do not know anyone with the name Jimmy.
Who is this Jimmy then?
It is the name of our dog.
Sir jee, I could not get anything, but got some mahaprasad after searching?
Yes. Alright, alright. Keep it inside.
There is law and order son! It prevails since the beginning but these locks do not open with those keys. That is why people have started breaking them.
Then what shall we do?
I will put your appeal at the court tomorrow but...
Look Sir, It is my right. Why are you calling it appeal all the time?
The law takes away my brother without any reason and you...
He has not done anything Sir jee.
His only fault is that he has named his dog Jimmy and the police was searching for some Jimmy and took him away.
It has been 15 days and he is nowhere to be found . His mother has fainted ten times.
The sister has lost herself after crying a lot and you? Will you call it justice?
Is this not the torture of the law, the police?
The police is meant to protect the law. Isn ` t it?
There should be something to protect. The law is not there on either sides.
It is like a guerrilla war, whoever gets the chance, puts the raid.
you will not be able to do anything Professor sahib.
The situation is even worst than it was during the Partition.
What shall I say now? It can only be understood by the person who feels the pain.
A person tolerates a mistake or a crime but cannot tolerate an innocent being punished.
The terrorists have also disturbed a lot.
Do the terrorists grow at fields?
The country and the government does not seem to be mine.
Do they belong to this country?
Grand mother! Has Pali come?
I have no idea when he comes and leaves these days, I have not met him.
I know. He can ` t see my pains but he should have seen me.
That day he threw the ointment and went.
He has not come since then. It has been eight days.
Alright, but who was driving the tractor at the backside then?
She is Viran. She is looking over the farm work these days.
Viran! Hey when did she learn to drive tractors?
When did you learn to drive tractors?
Kripal has taught you this. Didn ` t he?
See brother Pali! It is raining again.It is also uncertain like your mood.
It is a wonderful place Nanu uncle. I could have settled here if I had the opportunity.
What I should have done? Graze the cattle?
So what? If Ranjha can graze the cattle then we are little Ranjhas of sheep ` s size.
What was the matter? You could have also brought your beloved, Veeran.
I do not know uncle what could have happened?
How long has it been? A year?
It has been a year we have come here. I had seen him sometime four-five months back.
You still miss him. Don ` t you?
Bhai Sahib! What ` s your name Bhai Sahib?
What ` s the matter brother?
I guess I have seen you before...
Yes, Yes, You must have seen me, my photographs get published in a lot of newspapers.
Hey why are you wasting the Lassi? Go and do your work.
Look Bhai Sahib! I am not a thief or a bad person neither do I carry a weapon that I ` ll harm you.
Perhaps you can help me.
I had come out searching for some one but you please listen to me.
Hey, what is there?
Nothing is there. A couple of our boys, no goods.
You can certainly check it.
I was in school, when the teacher asked in the class , how did we get independence?
I was very little but still remember the scenes of the partition quite well.
The teacher made me stand before the class and then asked the other students of the class that who brought us independence? Say do you have any answer?
Was there a single person who fought and brought independence and gave that to us saying take it, we have brought independence for you.
We lost our fore fathers, we faced the bloodshed, our houses were destroyed and someone else brought the independence?
What is the name of your party?
I am not associated with any party.
I am not fighting the war of any religion or country, I am fighting the war of my constraints and helplessness.
This system wants to prove me unmanly but I am not an unmanly person.
Our forefathers were in a critical condition when they had come here from there to again become critical.
Brother! They had come to their house only.
What name did they get coming to their own motherland, they are refugees.
Is there someone also above the chief who is driving this movement?
Look dear! When an innocent persons is punished, he continues to get punished. When he cannot fight alone, he gathers people undergoing the same situation.
Sometimes in the name of locality, caste and religion and the country but his war is always against injustice.
See the history whenever you want. It has been happening and it will continue to happen.
Then why is the law there?
Has the law resolved any matter?
Don ` t you listen? The Inquiry commission keeps working for a couple of decades.
What do you mean? This war will never come to an end?
It has not yet ended.
Are there all the pulses?
Yeah! All the pulses are there.
Taran Singh has also brought two kg of kidney beans.
Hasn ` t Sahib jee come? Today is Sunday , he usually come on Sunday mornings.
He has come. He is buying vegetables and he must have been buying his non veg also.
Let me leave else everybody shall be in trouble.
You will not do anything like that. Swear by my name. Don ` t step forward from here.
And my brother is also there. You are his caretaker now.
Come with me. Where do you want to go? I shall leave you.
You shall not go anywhere from here.
Look Jassi! Can you convince Veera?
She is very stubborn.
Hey , will you not meet her?
We had to vacate the farmhouse because we feared that the police could reached there.
And you knew where had I been these days?
Yes, I knew. But I did not know where has the police reached.
The police has reached till the Gurudwara. It is at your footsteps.
If we were not wearing in this outfit , we could have been caught.
But why is the police searching me?
How did they know that I have done that?
Don ` t go back to your village, the police has kept a stern watch there.
Do you remember inspector Vohra? Your village is under him.
Are you coming from the Gurudwara?
Where were you the whole night?
I was working here till late night.
Is there any news from the commander?
It does not mean this brother.Whose is this? Must be yours. Isn ` t it?
Buddy can you please give a glass of milk! We were sitting for the tea and the milk curdled.
No , No, brother. Its not mine .It belongs to someone else.
What will you lose with a single glass? You can add water as an interest.
Instead of coming here I ran backward, towards the harvesting.
I was afraid dear!
When the bullet was fired it seemed as if the story has ended today.
A piece of flesh came out with the bullet. It was good that it did not hurt the legs.
We can raid the house if we get any evidence.
Put the goods which are kept here at nanu ` s place.
There is danger in the way in carrying it.
Kripal be careful. I shall come in sometime from around.
What is the time?
Kedarnath is coming on 13th March.
Who is Kedarnath?
The M.P of the 84 riots. He has become a minister these days.
Is he the same Kedarnath whom Jimmy had attacked in Delhi and escaped?
Yes. Manikaran Sahib is coming to get the blessings after being the minister.
All of them are drama kings. They always act.
Manikaran you have to cross the bridge to visit there . That is the ideal location to kill him.
His car might be bullet proof that is why a missile has been arranged.
I used to hide Grand father ` s knife in my books.
I stabbed that knife into his stomach in the lift one day.
I threw the books and ran away from there.
Hey , are you talking about the M.P. Kedarnath?
But he... Hey, Are you Jimmy?
Yes, they called me Jimmy there.
What happened Pali?
You can ` t say anything about Babajee ` s will.
Where is Pali?
He is outside. He will eat later.
Why not with us today?
Bhabhi(Sister in law) you also eat.
You eat Virjee(elder brother)!I will eat with them.
Veeeran! Shall I call you by this name?
They used to call me like this at home.
You did not tell from the market till here that you are Veeran, Our Kripal ` s Veeera.
I did not know he is here, I was not told.
How is grandmother?
She has passed away.
What happened grandmother?
You know they again caught Jassi brother.
Yes, I came to know that but...
She just could not tolerate that.
Say, what wrong did we do to anyone that we are pushed into this hell. They ruined the entire house.
How is Jassi?
I know what will happen to him, but is there any news from him?
Have the food at least.
Bhabhi!(sister in law), What is there for breakfast today?
There is halwa dear! You must be happy, you got relief from the kitchen and what is more you got home made food.
These lipped utensils..
Keep it there, I shall wash them.
Veeran! Since when you have come , you remain concerned about the home the entire day .
There were only boys before, so there was no anxiety.
Don ` t get worried about me.
I can manage the home and also the work for which I have come.
Do you want to take my test?
You will have to give the test that particular day.
Veer je! Don ` t get angry, he was just kidding.
By the way who is this Nafisa?
Bhabhi! You also started?
Hey, there is nothing hidden between a sister in law and a brother in law.
Tell me. I shall make you both meet.
She is at the other side of the border, Bhabhi(Sister in law).
She was very sweet, she used to orate Quran hearing which I wanted to turn into Islam.
Why did you come back then? You should have stayed there.
Nothing happens with the religion and no religion is bigger than the heart.
People beat me a lot Bhabhi(sister in law). They would have killed me but Nafisa helped me escape.
Can you see that hill? We shall go till there. Shall we go?
From where shall we go?
Lets take the way which follows the hill.
That car is standing there.
Lets go by car.
Ask Ram Singh to arrange the car.
Yes Sir! Everything is safe Sir.
In any case there is no scope of prosecution.
Yeah, I have myself checked all the arrangements.
Absolutely, Minister Sahib can come whenever he wants.
Sir jee! I have sent Simmi and the kid to the hostel.
Yes. To see Dalai lama ` s hermitage.
Yes, We shall also take his blessing if we meet him.
Let the children see that ambiance also.
That bloody disclosed everything in a single night.
He cannot speak. I swear by the name of Babe that he shall not speak. Never.
He knew I was there. How could he speak?
You are also involved in the conspiracy with him.
Wazeera has himself seen him going to the guest house, where the DC is staying.
I have doubt on you both and keep in my mind he shall never be imprisoned.
Vora Sahib! This girl is his fiance.
She wants to meet Kripal Singh , some secrets might get disclosed . This group might be identified.
No, No, not in the visiting room. It won ` t be good to bring Kripal singh there in such a condition.
Frisk her so that she cannot take any sort of weapons and let her meet in the cell itself.
Take her to barrack number two.
There will be guard outside and the door will be open. Frisk her properly.
It is not that easy to understand Ghalib, because when he is discussed, the life itself becomes a book and the past memories begin to cast in moulds.
He wanted that man should become human and should live his entire life doing the same.
Such is the culture and tradition of old Delhi which is very different and beautiful even being the capital of the country.
People spread the message of love and dearness to each other here.
Because Ghalib prevails in everybody ` s heart her.
Ghalib ` s language is still the language of the place.
Ghalib is still remembered with respect here.
Ghalib was born on 27th December, 1976 in Agra and died on 15th February, 1869 in Delhi.
Programs were held in the mansion of Ghalib situated in the Kashim Jan street of Chandani Chowk on the eve of Mirza Ghalib ` s Birthday.
Where many people remembered Ghalib by participating in it.
The shine of the mansion was worth watching during the program.
The museum made here was decorated.
While Ghalib wore new clothes and the curtains were cleaned.
The lights of the mansion were also repaired.
On the occasion the founder of the Ghalib foundation and the famous dancer Uma Sharma said that this place is no less than a pilgrimage.
A candle march was started from the town hall office of the municipal corporation in Uma Sharma ` s leadership.
Which finished at Ghalib ` s mansion.
The minister Harun Yusuf also remembered Ghalib during the program by lighting candle.
Sudheer Mishra has chosen the subject ` Sexual exploitation at work place ` in ` Inkaar ` .
Rahul and Maya work for an ad agency.
Rahul is a popular name of the ad world.
Rahul with his experience and knowledge makes the brilliant Maya sharp.
The film begins with the hearing of internal workable investigation committee.
We get to know about the storms of Rahul and Maya ` s lives from their statements and favors during the hearing.
Rahul ` s male ego could not tolerate Maya ` s success and equality.
At the surface there is the sentimental flow of Rahul and Maya ` s worsening relations.
After all Rahul is an Indian man.
During the last scenes ` Inkar ` becomes an ordinary and time pass film.
Arjun Ram Pal and Chitrangada Singh have portrayed their roles very well on the screen.
Despite a smaller role Gupta Jee ` s(Vipin Sharma)offensive comments are memorable.
If sudheer Mishra had a bold imagination and if he had gone with Maya then ` Inkar ` would have been a progressive film before Mahesh Bhatt ` s ` Earth ` in the 21st century.
He has raised the issue of sexual harassment in the film ` Inkar ` .
The way he has very beautifully presented an ordinary story on the screen is mesmerizing.
The logical way which Sudheer Mishra has maintained in the story is commendable.
The way flashback has been used in the interesting presentation of the story is also a big achievement.
The portrayal of allegations and its refusal is so simple that it seems the incident is taking place before the eyes.
The sweet and bitter relationship between C.E.O Rahul Verma(Arjun Ram Pal) and creative director Maya Luthra (Chitrangada Singh) has justifiably been portrayed.
He has not shown anything too colorful that seems awkward.
There are many questions and their answers in the film.
These questions and their answers are significant because the issue of sexual harassment is prevalent in the society from before.
Arjun Ram Pal and Chitrangada Singh have acted equally well.
The villainess of small screen Urvashi Dholakiya emerged as an actor of ` Big Boss ` .
When it was asked why did she win while Imam was rejected.
Urvashi says that the people who voted me can reply better.
In fact according to me Imam has not lost.
He became the star entertainer in the house of ` Big Boss ` .
I was getting calls for this show since the first season.
I kept on refusing every time.
While stepping into ` Big Boss ` , I had thought that I will not stay here for more than three weeks.
During the last phase of ` Big Boss ` wrangle between Urvashi and Imam prevailed.
Though both of them looked cool during the stage show with Salman at the end.
I have always been saying that Imam is also a nice person.
He used to care for everybody.
He has humanity , but when he used to show his other side , I did not understand.
His other side troubled everybody.
Yes, this platform provided me the opportunity to show my real face to the world.
There were also bad times in the life but I did not lose morale.
Although I admit that sometimes I also break down because I am a human being.
As far as courage is concerned I know one thing that life is all about saving your existence.
Actor Ram Kapoor will again be seen in the role of a host.
The show being telecast on Life ok from 21st January entitled ` Welcombaji Mehmanbaji ` is the Indian edition of the popular overseas show ` Come dine with me ` .
Here anchor Ram Kapoor will go for dinner at a celebrity ` s house every week with a participant celebrity.
In the first episode Nigar Khan , Sanaya Irani and Manoj Tiwary etc. will visit Ragini Khanna ` s home with Ram.
Ragini and Nigar hate each other.
Forbes magazine had released a list some time back which had the names of such Hollywood actors whose films were not doing the profit as they were paid.
Apart from the list of Forbes there are a lot many Hollywood superstars that are losing their stardom.
The stars who were at number two in terms of the most paid stars are at number one position in the list of over paid people.
Eddie ` s film Dr. too little and Shrek series made him popular because of his voice over.
Eddie has grown 51 years old.
Adam Sandlar who is 46 now and who gave so many hit films once upon a time is also listed in the list of overpaid actors now.
Adam Sandler has given super hit comedy films like happy gilmore, wedding singer.
Salman Khan ` s movie Kahi Pyar na ho jaye was based on the story of Wedding singer.
The movie Aks was based on the film of 48 year old Nicholas.
Will Smith has received the award of the most powerful Hollywood actor in 2007.
He is also a singer.
His films bad boys , independence day , men in black have made him a star in a very short time.
If we see the list of retiring stars in Hollywood then it is obviously long.
Pierce Brosnan, Leonardo De Capriyo, Cameroon Diyaz etc separated from James Bond are also seen gathering their stuffs.
Once again Adhyayan Suman is there in the field.
In ` Dehradun Diary ` - a film made under the banner Ashwagandha entertainment, Adhyayan has played the role of an man named Akash sharma who untiringly struggles to give justice to his elder brother.
His elder brother is killed because of a love relationship.
He loved a girl from a political family and wanted to marry her.
The family members of the girl resented to this relationship.
Playing a role for Dehradun Diary is very significant for Adhyayan suman who has acted in films like ` Hal e dil ` , ` Raz 2 ` and ` Jashn ` .
He says that, it is different from my last three films.
I am not a stereotyped hero here.
Ashyayan is the son of the popular actor Shekhar suman.
Is he getting the benefits of being a star son?
While answering this question, Adhyayan says that there is no nepotism in the field of art.
One can make space for himself only if he has caliber.
Adhyayan is working for films such as Himmatwala, Ekanki, Black Sheep and Heartless.
On the last day of 15th Indian theater festival, organized in Delhi the comic play ` Afsana ` entertained the viewers a lot.
Afsana means story.
The play directed by Abhijeet Sen Gupta is comic but through the characters here, it has been tried to put forth the behavior of whites against the blacks in a serious way.
Before the journey of Afsana, the viewers did the perusal of mythical story Ramayana through the northern Ramcharit play.
The play staged in Sanskrit influenced the viewers a lot.
The influential dialogue delivery of the characters of the play in LTG auditorium directed by Bhavbhuti was appreciated.
Finally the characters very beautifully present the reunion of Rama and Sita.
Now Paresh Rawal has also got involved in the list of stars willing to act on television.
I wish to do stand up comedy.
I am a very big fan of Kapil Sharma, the comedian of ` Comedy Circus ` .
My desires for acting on television has also strengthened after watching him.
Expectedly very soon I shall also be seen in some TV program.
The talks on that project has not reached its final stage, therefore I cannot declare it now.
Yes, I have no hesitation in saying this that I want to fulfill my wish of working for television.
Many things are special about colors golden petal awards this time.
After a long stretch of time Anil Kapoor and Madhuri Dixit will perform on the superhit song ` My name is lakhan ` of their film ` Ram Lakhan ` .
Apart from them many known celebrities including Salman Khan shall also perform.
While Kiran Kher shall hum the lines of her poem.
The set is prepared by Umang Kumar the fame of Black and Sawariya.
The statues of Brazil ` s hulking mask and royal dragon have been built.
Finally the dome shaped fort of Russia shall also be on the stage.
Drishti Dhami and Manish Paul shall bear the responsibility of anchoring the award ceremony.
On the occasion of popular evergreen singer Mohammad Rafi ` s birthday a program, ` Ek sham Rafi ke nam ` has been organized.
Then after kids also presented many dances.
The program was inaugurated by lighting candles.
While the listeners holding their heart, supported the singer Prem Bhatia by enjoying the songs when he put the memories of Rafi on stage.
The Bharatnatyam presentation of a school girl gathered quite a lot clapping.
The chief guest of the program Dr. Narendra Nath, the chairman of Yamuna cross development board and legislative Naseeb Singh paid tribute to Muhammad Rafi by offering flowers on his statue.
Many eminent people including the councilor Gurcharan singh Raju, ex. councilor Ramesh Pandit, Harish Gola and master Alauddin were present on this occasion.
The biggest theater festival of Asia ` Indian Theater Festival ` will begin from Saturday.
The staging of 87 best plays of the country and abroad will be held in the auditoriums situated at Mandi house area this biennial.
In the theater festival held from 5th till 20th January plays of many languages have been chosen where apart from regional languages ` foreign languages ` play shall also be staged.
For viewers, with most of the presentations subtitles in English and Hindi shall also be arranged.
The first presentation of the festival will be Vinay Sharma directed play ` Atmakatha ` where Kulbhushan Kharbanda will act on stage after a long time.
Actually since 1850 the regional adaptation of the Zoroastrian theater became very popular in cities and villages. Seeing this, the five topnotch and the successful commercial theater companies of the country have been invited in the theater festival this year.
On the occasion of 100 years of Sadat Hasan Manto ` s birth anniversary, six plays centered on him shall be staged.
The popular theater artists of the country shall come for the festival to pay tribute to Manto.
Here Danish Hussain and Mahmud Farukhi ` s ` Mantoiyat ` , Kewal Dhaliwal ` s ` Ik si Manto ` , Devendra Raj Thakur ` s ` Khol Do ` , NSD theater company ` s ` Dafa 292 and Pakistan ` s Sunil shankar, Shahid Nadim and Madiha Gauhar ` s ` Mantarama ` and ` Kaun hai ye gustakh ` plays shall be staged.
Apart from this seven plays based on the plays of Shakespeare, selected from the country and overseas shall be special.
Muhammad Rafi was on the top among such selected people.
His each and every talk , each and every way reflected his proximity towards people ` s heart.
I had first met Rafi Sahib through the musician Naushaad.
Both of them lived in Bandra locality.
On such an occasion my friend Suresh Nigam came to Mumbai.
Suresh was the film production officer of Uttar Pradesh and during those days he was directing a documentary made on some poetry of Urdu.
The name of the documentary was ` shayad ae mere bachhon ` .
From the beginning till the end the entire poetry was assimilated in the documentary and its only singer was Muhammad Rafi.
I acquainted Rafi also with this news and he also became anxious by listening to it.
He said in an advisable way that he does not need to go anywhere and should totally take rest.
sometime during noon the bell of my flat rang.
When I peeped through the magic eye, I saw Rafi Sahib there.
I was more surprised to open the door.
I saw a basket in his driver ` s hands.
Handing that over to my hands he said, I have brought maize ` s chapati and hot mustard leave ` s paste for you people.
Surrender it to your belly and then sleep peacefully.
It should be noted that Surjeet was the name of Suresh ` s wife and she was the daughter of a sardar.
Kannan Aiyar the director of ` Ek thi Dayan ` says that it is a thriller film.
It has the incorporation of magic and horror.
Imran Hashami plays the role of magician Bobo.
He is a big magician of the country.
He goes for a treatment to the psychologist.
The psychologist declares falsifies his thoughts but after some time he starts facing portent incidents.
According to Vishal, this film has been made centering the witch.
It has three potential witches.
People will not be able to recognize the real witch among the three witches.
The lead roles in the film are played by Huma Qureshi, Kalki Kochlin and Konkana sen Sharma.
konkana says that I have seen many horror films but haven ` t played such a role yet.
To be true, I always wanted to be a part of such films.
While Imran again being associated with horror films says that I have started loving the horror genre.
While there is a gossip that the lead role of ` Ek thi Dayan ` was also put before Ekta Kapoor whom she refused.
Ekta gave the reason that she would love to be a witch behind the screen only.
I am totally a witch in doing work and getting work done.
If a husband is like Ram then the woman should become Sita and on the demand of the situation shall also become Durga in order to protect her children.
In the gathering of young artists decorated with the melodies of traditional instruments the listeners are getting the chance to see best dance presentations along with the tunes.
People merrily enjoyed the musical program organized at the Sri Ram Center.
The tunes of the traditional Indian instrument lute touch the strings of heart also.
Artist Sameer Alwi gathered the moment with such alluring and dulcet tunes.
Young artist Vithika Tikkoo also played melodious tune through the water waves of santoor.
Apart from this the Bharatnatyam dance of young dancer Dakshina Vaidyanathan and Odisi dance of Supriya Nayan entranced the viewers.
On Thursday along with Sitar playing Manipuri and Kathak dance will be presented.
Amongst the films released last week ` Bandook ` didn ` t do well.
It was expected that Arjun Rampal and Chitrangda Singh starrer and Sudheer Mishra directed ` Inkar ` shall attract people.
Made in the style of ` Dabang ` and ` Singham ` , ` Mumbai Mirror ` emerged as a Mumbaiite film based on a Marathi background.
Sachin Joshi lacked the magic of Salman khan and Ajay Devgan.
Last week was not so profitable in terms box office.
Jacklin fernandis had never been much interested in cars before but her ideology has changed since when she has returned after shooting Abbas Mastan ` s film Race-2.
Actually many luxury cars are used for doing the chasing scenes in ` Race 2 ` .
During this time Jacklin got the chance to know and understand more about cars.
She thinks that now she has adequate knowledge about cars.
She can also talk about cars and give her opinions.
The opening of the grand literary festival of Jaipur Literature festival will be held on Thursday at the Diggi palace.
The opening of the function is significant because the vocative inauguration shall be done by the great author and activist Mahashweta Devi.
The vocation of Mahashweta Devi shall be held in the front lawn of Diggi palace.
With this approximately 280 authors, writers, artists, script writers, social activists and big shots from different fields shall share their experiences, elaborate the subject in 174 sessions for five consecutive days.
Like every time this time also the venue is decorated sinuously.
It reminds of the culture and tradition of the city.
Taslima Nasreen, the Bangladeshi author often surrounded by controversies has not been invited for the 37th international Kolkata book fair organized on Bangladesh ` s theme.
The famous poet and professor of Bangla at the Dhaka University, Anisujamman is coming to inaugurate the function.
The biggest literary festival of the country will be opened for the common readers from 30th January.
Youth musicians and dancers festival organized by the support of art, culture and language department of Delhi government ` s council of literary art began on Wednesday.
Chief Minister Sheila Dixit inaugurated the program.
The vice chairperson of the music theater academy was present at the inaugural function.
The Bengali literature developed in the middle of 19th century.
Raja Rammohan Roy, Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar, Michael Madhusudan Dutt, Bankimchandra Chattopadhyay and Rabindra Nath Tagore have played significant role for this.
In the beginning the Bangla authors used Hindi and English instead of Bangla.
Pandit Bankimchandra Chattopadhyay made his entry into Bangla literature.
He educated from Hugli college and Presidency college.
He graduated in 1857 and received the law degree in 1869.
Bankimchandra Chattopadhyay, the composer of Vande Mataram is identified as a Bangla poet,novelist, writer and journalist.
His first published composition was Rajmohan ` s wife.
It was composed in English.
His first published Bangla creation ` Durgeshnandini ` was published in March,1865.
It is a romantic novel.
He also published a monthly ` Bangdarshan ` in 1872.
` Anandmath ` (1882) is a political novel.
The 1773 religious rebellion of north Bengal has been described in this novel.
This book has the spirit of patriotism.
The last novel of Chatterjee is ` Sitaram ` (1886).
It shows the resistance of a Hindu ruler against the Mughal rule.
He also wrote many essays based on religion, society and contemporary issues.
The novels of BankimChandra Chattopadhyay was translated in all the languages in India.
He only has this honor in Bangla literature.
Middle class readers associate themselves with his novels.
The emergence of cultural consciousness of the country in contemporary Hindi poetry took place during the romance period whose subsequent development is seen in the free-will poetry.
It is primarily based on nationalism.
Maithilisharan Gupt is the poet of this genre.
National poet Maithilisharan Gupt (1885-1964) is a significant poet of Hindustani.
It is the biggest contribution of Gupt jee in the history of Hindi poetry.
Saket is the supreme pinnacle of his composition.
He shall always be immortal through his writings and shall be a source of inspiration for the new poets in the coming centuries.
The poetry Sarjana of Maithilisharan Gupt has perpetual significance.
It has the introduction of the country ` s past, perspective of the present and future vision.
He used to do poetry as Kanaklata.
The school education could not be completed because of paying more attention towards sports.
He studied Hindi, Bangla, Sanskrit literature at the home itself.
Munshi Ajmeri jee guided him.
He started composing poetry in Braj language at the age of 12.
He came into contact with Acharya Mahaveer Prasad Dwiwedi.
His poems began to be published in the monthly Saraswati in Hindi.
First published poetry compilation was ` Rang me bhang and then ` Jaydrath Vadh ` got published.
He also translated the poetry volume ` Meghnath vadh ` and ` Brajangana ` .
` Bharat Bharati ` steeped with the spirit of nationalism was published in the year 1914 BC.
His popularity spread everywhere.
He started writing the epic ` Saket ` in 1916-17 BC.
The indifference towards Urmila was cleared away through this volume.
Saket and other volumes like Panchwati etc. were completed in 1913.
` Yashodhara ` was written in 1932 BC.
Gandhi Jee gave him the title of ` National Poet ` .
Under personal passive resistance he was sent to jail.
He was honored with D.lit from Agra University.
He was nominated as a member of Rajya Sabha from 1952-1964.
Indian government honored him with the ` Padma Vibhushan ` award.
The then president Dr. Rajesndra Prasad gifted him the volume ` Abhinandan ` in 1962 and was honored with D.lit by the Hindu University.
The death of Anuj Siyaramsharan Gupt in 1963 BC gave an irreparable shock.
He got a heart attack on 12th December, 1964 and it was the set off of the shining star of literature.
He wrote two epics, 19 short narrative poetry, poetry songs, plays etc. at the age of 78 years.
His poetry reflects national consciousness, religious feelings and human elevation.
The three sections of ` Bharat Bharati ` portray the past , present and future of the country.
He was an exceptional poet of the humanist, moral and cultural poetry stream.
According to Dr. Nagendra he was a national poet,a true national poet.
Pratap Press was the central meeting point of the national poet Maithilisharan Gupt and the daring journalist Ganeshankar Vidyarthi who circulated the newspaper named Pratap from Kanpur.
Both the authors were trying to bring independence for the country through the Pen power.
Both the great men were sympathetic with great hearts.
They had generous heart.
He also had familiar relationships with other contemporary poet Sachidanand Hiranand Vatsyayan Agyeya.
Agyeya called him Dadda with respect.
He poured the feeling of patriotism in the entire country in the field of poetry through his writings.
Maithilisharan Gupt was born to Seth Ramcharan das Jee Gupt on 3rd August 1886 in the jhansi block of Chirgaanv village.
Mahatma Gandhi provided him the honor of being called as a national poet.
Looking at his services, the Indian government provided him the membership of Rajya Sabha twice.
Being born in Bundelkhand, Gupt jee only used Bundelkhandi language while speaking.
He passed away in Chirgaanv on 12th December, 1964.
He prospered Hindi with his literary customs.
Maithilisharan Gupt ` s life was totally filled with the feeling of nationalism.
This is so because all his compositions are steeped with national ideology.
He was the keen disciple of Indian culture and history.
But he never believed on superstitions and hollow ideals.
He desired for the modern picture of the Indian culture.
The poetry of Maithilisharan Gupt is the literature of the understanding of human life.
At the center of his compositions Gupt jee considered joint family to be the bast.
The family of Dashrath in ` Saket ` is the best example of this.
Alongside he has expressed his abysmal sympathy towards neglected and victimized women.
Gupt jee favors an exploitation free society.
He likes that Ram Rajya where a King easily renounces all his luxuries for the welfare of its subjects.
He made Hindustani so simple that it had the assimilation of a sweet language like Braj.
Apart from being a poet Maithilisharan Gupt was also as dramatist.
` Chandrahas ` is a play that visually displays the history.
It transmits the significance of destiny and Karma.
` Tilottama ` is a legendary play.
It has uprooted the distinctions like high and low, touchable and untouchable and honored the values like service and humanity.
Their is stress on modernity in the play but not merely for the neo thing.
The influence of righteous Gandhism values of freedom struggle is everywhere on Maithilisharan Gupt.
Public service or human service is also the subject of Saket and Yashodhara.
Those values are presented with a feel of Buddhism in this play.
In the compositions of Gupt jee, domesticity and family life are the basis of human values.
How should a king be and what is his religion?
In a way ` Anagh ` is a play against multilevel corruption, injustice and resistance.
He had been considering the conscience of Gandhi jee as the values and that value and voice is more in infinite.
The endeavor of Vishambharnath towards national education for the preparation of agitation is the evidence of the first role of Gupt jee ` s political resourcefulness.
The basic nature of the play and the ease of language have been taken care of while translating.
The revolt against atrocities and injustice and the attempts of changing human behavior also have been the subjects of his other compositions.
Maithilisharan Gupt is the poet of the forte factor behind a woman ` s life and her honor.
Woman is inspired by the family values in his plays.
Generally in all the plays the female characters not only identifies the truth but also express themselves in an honest way.
The popular painter Amrita Shergil was born in Budapest, the capital of Hungary in 1913.
Her father Umraav Singh was an Indian and her mother was a Hungarian woman.
Her name is included amongst the leading artists of the modern revolution in the Indian arts.
She became a mature painter at a very young age, her distinguished talent was recognized and she got the encouragement for her work from her Indian uncle Erwin Bakhte.
She got her training in 1924 in Paris from Lucien Simon and pear Vayam.
She took admission in Ecol the bow arts of Paris at the age of 16.
In 1934 Amrita Shergill was selected as an associate in grand cello for her work Conversation.
She was the first Asian and the youngest women on this post but after being motivated that her work as a painter will be completed in India, she came back to India after leaving behind the beginning of opportunities and success of Paris.
She considered Bangla style to be a regressive one and declared it to be responsible for the stagnancy which became the character of Indian Paintings.
Amrita Shergil was skilled at using colors.
The colors she used were self willed and violent; and against the then prevalent light colors.
She traveled south India in 1937 and this journey gave a format to her future works.
Her works of this period include three pictures series of south India also are- Brahmachari , south Indian villagers going to market and bride ` s toilet.
During that time the Indian painting was completely different from the prevalent realistic water color methods.
Along with the shapes these pictures showed her experiments and aligning the powerful influence of Ajanta and Elora cave pictures were her first attempts.
Amrita Shergill who has always been engaged in experimentation turned towards the small mughal paintings of the 17th century here and she included her Ajanta oil paintings developed in formal style in its fusion and colors.
She died at the age of just 28 years in 1941 because of a mysterious disease.
Her last and incomplete work shows the use of more dark colors than before and her inclination towards the abstract.
The great novelist and story writer of the Hindi literature Munshi Premchand was on 31st July, 1880 in the Lamhi village of Benaras.
His father ` s name was Ajayab lala and his mother ` s name was Anandi Devi.
His father was a clerk at the Post office.
He had six acres of land at the village.
He received his primary education in Urdu and Persian from a priest in Lamhi itself.
He passed his matriculation from Benaras.
After the demise of his father Premchand ` s days were spent in adversities.
He held the post of a teacher and school inspector at places like Allahabad, Pratapgarh, Kanpur, Gorakhpur etc.
He completed his B.A in this series.
` Behind every successful man there is a woman ` this saying also proves to be true for Prem Chand.
By the way Prem chand ` s first marriage was unsuccessful.
But his second wife Shivrani Devi gave him the freedom to write despite many kinds of scarcities.
Many of his stories were published with the name Nawab Rai.
The first story with the name Prem chand was ` Bade ghar ki Beti ` .
The credit of making Premchand a great author of Hindi goes to Mannan Dwiwedi and Mahaveer Prasad Poddar.
Almost 250 stories of Premchand have been compiled with the title Mansarovar.
Like his novels, this volume is also constituted in its usual nature and style and the comprehensive dimensions of north Indian life has been made its theme.
Generally these stories pints towards some morality or they reveal some psychological truth.
Godan is considered to be Premchand ` s most significant composition.
His popular stories include Namak ka daroga, Poos ki raat, kafan etc.
Premchand worked as a teacher until he got involved in Gandhi jee ` s Non co-operation movement in 1921.
He also did the writing work for ` Madhuri ` and ` Chand ` magazines.
He launched the magazine ` Hans ` on March, 1930 but always struggled from economic crisis.
He went to Mumbai because of economic problems and to write dialogue but he could not even spend a single year there.
As an author he first became reputed for the novels and stories written in Urdu.
` Rang Bhumi ` made him the novel-emperor.
This great author died on 8th October, 1936.
The revolutionary poet of the modern Hindi Suryakant Tripathi ` Nirala ` was born in 21st February, 1899 in Mahishadal, Bengal.
Nirala remained present as one such poor but happy revolutionary who always accepted challenges.
The poet who wrote vigorous classics like the Shakti Puja of Rama, started prosody-free poetries breaking the norm of prosodies.
By 1930 the central characters like Chaturi Chamaar started appearing in his prose.
So many incidents took place in Nirala ` s life.
His paternal village was at the center place of struggling farmers culture.
His childhood was spent in Bengal where Indian social and cultural renaissance revolution was at its peak.
The entire writing of Nirala jee favors social and cultural revival which gives a new dimension to romanticism.
Whether it was poetry, stories , novels or essays Nirala seems to probe the truth of his era.
Nirala jee has composed many works.
Nirala jee has also written many novels and essays.
Nirala jee also edited ` Matwala ` and ` Samanvay ` for some time.
Nirala jee took his last breath on 15th October, 1961 in Prayag.
R.K. Narayan the famous Indian author of English language was born on 10th October, 1906 in Chennai.
His full name was Rasipuram Krishnaswamy Narayanswamy.
Before becoming a writer R.K. Narayan also worked as a teacher.
His first novel Swamy and friends(1935) has a description of the exciting acts of a group of boys in different contexts.
The background of Narayan ` s all the books after this was a fictitious city of south India, Malgudi.
Narayan generally depicts human relationships, attributes and the ironies of daily Indian life where the modern city life collides with the old traditions.
His style is sober which has the blend of cultured comic, elegance and simplicity.
The theme of his two sectioned autobiography is ` My days: Amemwa and my dateless diary: An American journey.
The Indian government honored him with ` Padmabhushan ` in 1964 and ` Padmavishan ` in 2000.
He received the ` Sahitya Academy ` prize in 1958 for his work ` The guide ` .
Narayan was honored with A.C. Benson award by the ` Royal society of literature ` in 1980.
Devakinandan Khatri is an author who came after the era of Bharatendu in Hindi literature.
Novels are primarily included in the literature written by him.
Where instead of a realistic storyline a fictitious storyline was built.
` Bhutnath ` was completed by his son Durga Prasad Khatri.
The novel Chandrakanta has a big contribution in the propagation of Hindi language.
The novel won everybody ` s heart.
Many non Hindi speakers learnt Hindi language for testing the delight of this book.
Devakinandan Khatri jee was born on 29th June 1861 ( Ashadh Krishnapaksha saptami samwat 1918) Saturday in Pusa, Muzzafarpur, Bihar.
The primary education of Devakinandan Khatri jee was carried in Urdu & Persian.
Later he also studied Hindi, Sanskrit and English.
He later established a printing press in Varanasi and initiated a Hindi monthly ` Sudarshan ` in 1883.
The magical fictional literature of Devakinandan khatri jee has another story.
Since childhood Devakinandan Khatri jee was fond of travelling.
In the past when the contracts of the forests were taken away from him he composed the novel Chandrakanta mixing his imagination of the works of magicians and detectives keeping the same ruins of the forests, hills and ancient historical buildings as the background.
In the contemporary phase his role in the propagation of Hindi through literature has been remarkable.
Most of the Hindu people during those days knew Hindi when Babu Devakinandan Khatri jee started writing novels.
In such a situation the major aim of Khatri jee was to compose a work through which Hindi could be propagated.
Chandrakanta novel became so popular that those who did not know to read and write in Hindi or only knew Urdu learnt Hindi to just read this novel.
Keeping its popularity in mind extending this story he wrote another novel ` Chandrakanta Santati ` which was multiply interesting than ` Chandrakanta ` .
Chandrakanta(1888-1892)- Lakhs of people learnt Hindi to read the novel Chandrakanta.
The novel is parted in four sections.
Chandrakanta Santati(1894-1904)- Inspired by the unprecedented success of Chandrakanta, Devkinandan Khatri jee composed Chandrakanta Santati, a large novel comprising of 24 sections.
This novel also became greatly popular.
Bhutnath(1907-1913)- (Uncompleted) Devakinandan jee composed this novel by giving one of the characters of Chandrakanta Santati the role of Protagonist.
But because of untimely death he could only write 6 sections of the novel after which the rest of the 15 sections were completed by his son Durgaprasad Khatri.
The popular educationist patriot, the originator of tradition and culture and the founder of Benaras Hindu University abbe Pandit Madan Mohan Malviya was a great man of this generation.
It is noteworthy that abbe Malviya had an unparalleled position in the country in terms of truth , Brahamcharya, exercise, patriotism and self denial.
Abbe always remained soft spoken in his behavior.
Work was his life.
Apart from a lifetime alignment with Benaras Hindu University he remained engaged in public service by working in many organizations.
As a sharp journalist, Madan Mohan Malviya aroused his invisible pen ideologies and gave the message of motherland service and societal creation.
Abbe Malviya jee had participated in the second conference of the Indian national congress organized in 1886 in Kolkata during his teaching period.
Inspired by the eloquence of abbe Malviya jee, Dadabhai Narojee in his presidential illumination said that his voice has the voice of mother India.
The second sojourn of abbe ` s journalistic life was the institution and editing of Abhudaya.
Abbe Malviya jee also fought for independence through this paper.
Abbe Malviya jee edited it for about two years.
After this the publishing of an English paper named ` Leader ` began from Allahabad.
Abbe Malviya jee wanted to send the message of independence to the non Hindi speaking regions through this paper.
With the inspiration of Malviya jee in 1929 its Hindi version ` Bharat ` was also started being published.
An year after the publication of ` Leader ` , with the efforts of Malviya jee a paper named ` Maryada ` was also started being published.
Many essays written on political problems by Malviya were published in this paper.
Abbe Malviya jee started a weekly paper named ` Sanatan Dharma ` from Benaras on 20th July 1933 which was inspired by the then situation of the country.
Abbe Malviya jee also gave his significant contribution in the circulation of many papers and magazines
If you are in Nagaland or particularly in Kohima in the month of November.
Kisama village is located at a distance of just 12 kilometers from Kohima.
As you reach here you reach into horn bill festival i.e Dhanesh festival.
Dhanesh festival was started by the Nagaland government in the first year of the new millennium.
Since then every year it is being organized in the first week of December.
The festival celebrated for a week ties every Nagaland inhabitants in a single thread and it turns into a fair where people from every corner of the state and the people from neighbour states assemble and participate in colorful presentations.
Here we get to see the amazing blend of crafts, games, food fair, traditional games and rituals.
Traditional arts such as hand made paintings, wooden crafts and architectures are exhibited in the fair.
Here a special proclivity of people is seen towards many amazing games like climbing the oily bamboos and ` Naga Raja ` chilly eating competition.
Here the medicine shops of indigenous herbs remain overcrowded.
If you are interested in historical places after enjoying the traditional tribal culture of various tribes and species, you can visit the Kohima war memorial.
The war memorial was built in the memory of the martyrs of the second world war.
The dhanesh festival propagated at a bigger level is a little different from the traditional festivals and rituals of Nagaland.
During Dhanesh festival it is taken care of that here only those rituals are included which can also be enjoyed by the people from outside.
This festival signifies happiness and pride.
Every year a village represents a tribal community.
Nagaland is said to be the ` land of festivals ` .
The 16 big tribes and the sub tribes of the state have their own method of abiding the exclusive cultural tradition which they express by art exhibitions during Naga festivals.
80 percent of the state ` s population is directly associated with agricultural work.
The peculiarity of the Naga festivals is that they can be identified with Christianity values.
Despite this its locality, traditions and feel cannot be compared with anything.
The Aoleng Monyu festival of the konyak tribe of the Mou district is celebrated after sowing crops.
Aolenge Lee- This festival is celebrated in the month of March-April for six days.
In this Yangwa and Kahshih gods are prayed for good health , security , good yield and growth of generation.
Earlier this festival also used to be a medium of fixing engagements and marriages.
Bushu is a eight day festival which is celebrated by the kachari tribes of the Dimapur district in the last week of January.
For the kacharis, Bushu is a music of the soul.
On this day kacharis eat a lot, dance and marry.
Meanwhile the tradition of respecting elders is also obeyed.
Jemen Liyangmai tribe known as Jeliyang of the Paren district celebrates a festival named Melingi Nachegankhia every year in the month of March and October after sowing crops.
The festival begins after chanting mantras and lighting fire by the priest of the village which symbolizes the security of women and children against enemies and wild animals.
The festival also provides a chance for a gathering of the family members at a place.
During this time the exchange of gifts, organization of community feast, round of drinking and letting drink and cultural activities takes place.
The Yimchungru tribe of Tyunsang and Kifire district celebrates Metum Niyo festival.
The festival related to crops continues for five days beginning from 8th August.
The local belief is that the Arimpu god who drinks the fermented drink wants that the people associated with crops should take a five day leave from work.
After the announcement of the festival by the priest a sacrifice of a healthy animal is made.
The Kuki tribe celebrates Mimkut festival in the month of January to please demons.
The festival begins with the sacrifice of two white cocks.
The Ao tribe of Mokokchung district celebrates Moatsu festival after sowing crops in the month of May.
The game ` Tug of war ` is organized which exhibits the weeding of paddy crops.
The actual meaning of Moatsu is the betterment of crops in the days to come.
These youngsters roam around the village while dancing so that the bad omen runs away.
The Sangtam tribe of the Tyuyensang-kifire celebrate agriculture festival Mongmong for six days in the month of September every year.
Digit six is considered to be lucky amongst the Sangtam tribe.
Children are also named after six days of birth.
Monyu is the festival after sowing which is celebrated every year by the Fom tribe of longlong district for six days before a crisis.
The literal meaning of Monyu is affection and respect towards women and this festival is an opportunity of exhibiting affection and respect towards the married girls and sisters by the male members of the family.
Every year the Chang tribe of the Tyuyensang district celebrates Nakyulum the festival of the freedom from darkness
The Pochuri tribe of phake district celebrates Najhu the festival of sowing for ten days in the month of February every year.
Najhu is a festival of spiritual relationship between the dead people and their unseen protectors.
During the Najhu festival apart from other rituals pairs are also chosen by the unmarried people.
The rengma tribe of Kohima district celebrates Nagda festival every year in the month of November after the harvesting of crops.
The rengma people believe that nagda is the mother power of all the festivals.
The mother of every family tastes the new grain after harvesting and the festival begins after this.
The Angami tribe of Kohima district celebrates Sekrenyi fetival for ten days after harvesting.
Officially the beginning day of this festival is 15th February.
According to the Angami philosophy human body is the blend of Umo(physical) and Yufo(nonphysycal).
The festival begins with the bath of male members of the community at a sacred well.
The Lotha tribe of the Vokha district celebrates nine days Tokhu Imong festival in the first week of November.
As compared to other festivals Tokhu Imong is the festival of rest and during this time the villagers do not hunt, catch fishes, do not trade and travel.
The Khiyamniyugam tribe of tyuensang district celebrates sokum for eight days.
During sokum the announcement of the manufacturing of new Jhoom farm is made.
The Sumi tribe of Junheboto believes that Tuluni festival is an opportunity to honor its warriors and exhibit blaze.
During festivals also the physical and mental capacities of youngsters are tested.
Even for marriage relations women exhibit their health power.
There is an archaic tradition of festivals in Nagaland so that they are able to recover themselves in adverse conditions.
So much so that the color of festivals did not become faint in the journey from early society to the mainstreams of religious beliefs.
It is surprising that most of the people here abide Christianity and follow western culture.
Festivals play the role of supplying happiness and energy in the everyday life of Naga people.
If it had not happened, the life of people in this remote area would not have been so easy.
Hey you have topped the intermediate examinations.
Alright tell me where is your father?
Brother Karan! What happened to you?
You are beaten today also?
Rahim chacha! You will be definitely be beaten if are late for the class.
Hey Suman! Don ` t think yourself to become a big shot.
Really! There is a wonderful bonding between the daughter and the father.
Rahim Sahib! I am alive because of her support, otherwise this jumping and running is not possible at this age.
Stay happy like this.God bless you.
Brother Karan! You have got a job in Dubai.
Here is your passport and rest of the important documents.
Brother Karan! What have you thought about Suman?
I am planning you leave Suman at my friend Kishan ` s house in the city.
You are worried a lot about me that is why you are leaving me here.
I remain worried about you dear.
I need to earn money, decorate the house and see you off.
I do not know anybody there in the city.
Alright, you are worried about this.
Hey Kishan! Listen to what she is saying.
Hey crazy girl.Kishan and Bhabhi shall love you very much.
Such is my bonding with that family. It has been many years I have met Kishan.
Sometimes I feel like hugging him.
Truly speaking daughter, sometimes I get worried about you and sometimes about him. Towards his friendship of which I am clueless! When did it happen, why did i happen?
I never used to study but he always remained tangled in books.
He dreamt of going to the city, of getting promoted, being rich but the pocket remained empty.
He became shy while asking me for money, Idiot.
He laughed and it made me happy.
Once he sold his books and came to me to return the money. I pulled my hand and slapped him tightly.
He mistook my friendship as an obligation.
I got relief only after bringing back his books.
I remember the day when she got married. she stepped into a new world.
I have got such a cute Bhabhi, she kept smiling all the time.
But I knew that she was upset for years.
His fortune became bright with son, Kishan got the chance to go to the city.
He started his business there, became a rich man and those people came once again when your mother passed away.
Your Bhabhi(sister in law) took care of you for a week like a mother.
While sitting at the train Bhabhi(sister in law)hugged you and also cried a lot.
He wrote letters for few years and then started getting busy in work.
Hey Suman! What happened?
Nothing dear, We shall go to the city tomorrow.
Hey, very nice Bhabhi(sister in law)! You have very beautifully decorated the house.
My Suman has become very beautiful, very cute!
Bhabhi(Sister in law)! I am getting a very nice smell.
I know that you are getting a very good flavor of pigeon pea, seasoned with cumin and asafoetida.
Sit, I shall bring the food in a while.
Bhabhi( Sister in law)! Is Kishan there at home?
You didn ` t tell me where he is?
His meeting is going on now.
Bhabhi(Sister in law)! Kishan ` s hair have started becoming grey.
I have committed a big sin today.
Don ` t lie with Aunty.
But she will not feel bad, I know her since childhood.
Rarely an orphan receives such an affection from anybody.
It has been very late. Uncle jee has yet not come.
Hey he is very busy these days. He is building up a big cabin for his son in the office.
He says he shall give it as a gift.
He loves Prem Sahib a lot.
Yes, Just don ` t ask the way he loves.
He never meets him like a father, he only meets him like a sportsperson, will shake hands, will play fist fight and then fondly race with him.
I had gone to get book for Prem.
Its a bad day today. I ` ll go mad.
Being upset and crying alone like this is injurious to health.
Hey wow!He said it once and you wiped the tears.
So what? When you have made the friendship you ` ll also have to obey it.
How is the leg ` s pain now?
Hey You! Please Come.
It is just a little sprain. Sit, it will be fine.
Suman! I am sorry.
There is a principle of friendship mister! No sorry, No thank You, Alright?
Listen, Keep this medicine there.
Suman! Shall I put the ointment?
I shall keep my eyes closed,Promise.
What does he think of himself? He does not have the manners to talk.
Did you feel bad?
Yes, of course.
And don ` t ask `` why `` this time.
Go and bring food for me.
I am very hungry.
Hey Prem! What happened?
Did I do anything wrong by touching it?
You also want the same thing what I want.
Aunty jee! Uncle Jee hasn ` t come?
They directly went to the factory.
Hey Prem why did you come so early dear?
Mother! Friend ` s friendship has pulled me here.
Friend ` s Friendship. What do you mean?
Mother in law! I had called, that is why he has come.
Let me touch your feet mother!
Why? What happened to you?
Actually my stomach is not well for the last two days mother in law.
