It remained his quality that on one hand where he wrote poems on ancient topics like lord devotion etc. on the other he also adopted new topics like social reform , patriotism etc.
Therefore according to the topic his poems are aesthetic-based, social issues based and patriotism based.
His interest was in Prem Shringar Rasa too.
Bharatendu ji has given a beautiful description of both sides of the Shringar, the union and detachment.
He gave the description of many social issues in his poetry.
He made bitter satires of rampant abuse in society.
He didn ` t even leave the capitalists and the people who take bribes.
Deep patriotism towards the country knocks in the poetry of Bharatendu Harishchandra.
The turbulence produced by the current condition of the country appeared in his poetry too.
Bharatendu is also a poet who remains captivated on the picture of nature too.
But due to being a realistic poet, nature is not much present directly in his poems.
In the nature illustration Bhartendu Jee did not get much success, because he was the artificer of the human-nature, in the outer nature his mind did not indulge completely.
Hence, in the most of his natural illustrations there is a lack of the power to attract the human heart.
When Bhartendu Jee was writing then Khadi Boli was being popular in the poetry writing.
The language of the poetry of the Bhartendu Jee is primarily Brajbhasha.
Leaving outdated words of the Brajbhasha he adopted the reformed form of it.
In his language the famous words of Urdu and English also come here and there.
In the language of the Bhartendu Jee , somewhere inaccuracy related to the grammar are also found to see.
Idioms have been used skillfully.
The language of the Bhartendu jee is simple and pragmatic.
That ` s why in that there is a mixture of the sentiments and usage.
In the poem of the Bhartendu Harishchandra there is the inclusion of the all delicacy.
Shringar and Shaant genere is prominent.
Bhartendu Jee has beautifully described both aspects of the Shringar.
In his poem idea of the comedy is also found.
He has adopted almost every popular verse in his poem.
He has given the place not just of the Hindi but prosody of the Urdu, Sanskrit, Bangla language also.
The service work of the modern proponent of the Hindi literature Bhardendu is extraordinary.
In the modern Hindi literature Bhartendu Jee has very important position.
Bhartendu was the master of the versatility.
He has remarkable contribution in all the fields like poem, fiction, drama, novel, essay, etc.
Bhartendu Jee emerged with the message of the Renaissance in the Hindi literature.
He did the important work in the round development of the Hindi.
By assimilating the novelty and originality in the quote, language and style he made them according to the modern period. .
He is considered as the father of the modern Hindi.
The inception of the dramas of the Hindi was also done by him.
Bhartendu Jee was literary leader of his time.
In the service of the mother tongue he has contributed not just his life but whole property also.
From his perspective, at that time Hindi was the symbolical language of the country ` s uplifting.
Thread of the national integrity was Hindi.
From the name of the Bhartendu a whole era of the journalism is recognised.
In this era, getting motivation and encouragement from his energetic compositions, series of many blessed self addressee journalists-litterateur was prepared.
Bhartendu was a writer, poet, journalist, editor, essay writer, dramatist, satirist and skilled orator.
The whole era facing with his this talent was called the golden era of the journalism.
In this era, new experiment, new writing and new style got proper encouragement.
Satirist hiding inside is vocalized very skillfully in the paper-magazines published-conducted by him.
Publications like Harishchandra Chandrika, Kavivachan Sudha, Harishchandra Magazine, Stri Bala Bodhini give the knowledge of his thoughtful and progressive perspective.
It would be the matter of the affection toward mother tongue or would be the bonfire of the imported cloths.
Before many years from the modern leaders Bhartendu had blown the bugle.
In his edited magazines in their motivation Bhartendu made his aim the progression of the society , see the example of his this progressive thought that during those days for the women he published the ` Stri Baal Bodhini ` magazine and the women who were studying English used to be gifted the sari from the side of the magazine.
This magazine had been presented as the form of the friend of the women during those days.
He wanted to make women of the India aware through Harishchandra magazine.
In his essays and dramas the patriotism of the Bhartendu seems spilling out.
See this irony that Bhartendu irrigated form his blood the Kavi Vachan Sudha , when in 1885 Bhartendu died , then in that no obituary was published and no homage was given even.
Bhartendu was cheated by his own but like an innocent child he never loosens to believe.
If he would be said herald of the Hindi Renaissance then it will not be exaggerated.
The epoch-maker of the modern Hindi Bhartendu Babu Harishchandra, on the June month of the 1877 organised by the Hindivardhani Society of the Kashi read the written lecture on the subject of the development of the Hindi that was completely poetic.
The language frames the human cultures and influences his understanding.
It is the saying of the Linguist that after learning one language it is good to learn another language.
But misfortune of the country ` s indigenous language is this that despite of getting the status of the distinct state this country is still untouched from the most fundamental language conception of the education for the personality development.
The era of the Bhartendu was the period of the fall of the cultural tradition in this, language dialects were also being changed from the westernization of the society.
In such condition itself he presented these thoughts regarding mother tongue.
To establish the Indian language in place of the English was the main aspect of the concern of the Bhartendu.
He talked about the subordination which is being established gradually at its core even in thought.
Bhartendu used the ` Nijbhasha ` (our language) word in the broad perspective.
Here his meaning is not just our language.
He has the meaning of it from the all the languages of the country.
And in this with the local language, regional language the ancient language Sanskrit should be also included.
This is also the ancient language of the India, in the legacy the glimpse of the Indian ancient life shadow is established.
Sharatchandra Chatopadhyaya, in his written novels has presented the story of the society in the way in that from an intellectual consciousness an attempt is included to know the anomalies, inconsistencies of the life of the contemporary Bengal.
The famous novelist of the Bangala took birth on the 15th September, year 1876 at the place named Devanandpur.
He cleared the entrance at the age of 18 years.
During these days he wrote a novel with the name of Basa (house), but this composition was not published.
The deep impact of Ravindra Thakur and Bankimchandra Chatopadhyaaya was over him.
Sharatchandra was the student of the fine arts but due to economic crunch he could not study this subject.
After coming back from the Burma he started to write his famous novel Shrikant.
In Burma he came in contact with a person named Bangchandra though he was very intelligent but was alcoholic and undisciplined.
From here itself the seed of the Charitraheen was sown, in that with the description of the mess life there is the story of the love with the maid of the mess.
When once he came from Burma to Calcutta then left his some composition with one of his friends in the Calcutta.
Without telling Sharat serial publication of one composition Badi Didi from those has been started.
Just after releasing of one two issue stir spread among people and they started to say that perhaps Ravindranath is writing by changing his name.
Sharat got this news after five and half years.
Whatever was there he became famous, even though many problems have occurred in the publication of Charitraheen.
Editor of the Bharatvarsh poet Dwijendralal refused to publish it by saying it that it is against the morality.
SharatChandra Chatopadhyaya has got the similar position in Bangla fiction literature as Ravindranath Tagore has got into the poetry of this language.
On the Bengal revolutionary movement the Kolekar Pather Davi novel was written.
In this novel there is the description of the life story of the Subhash Chandra Bose.
It had been seized by the British government.
Novels of the Sharat have been translated in the many Indian languages.
It is said that his heroines are more powerful than his male characters.
His creation touches the heart deeply.
But in the Sharat literature, despite of having all the elements, in this less light falls over the social conflicts , exploitation etc.
In the Palli Samaj, some picture of the society comes in front.
In some stories like Mahesh etc question of the exploitation appears.
On the basis of his novel Hindi pictures has been made many times.
On the basis of his novel ` Charitraheen ` in 1947 with this name itself movie had been created.
After that, making the base Devadaas film has been made three times.
Beside that on the basis of Charitraheen in 1974, Parineeta-1953 and in 2005 also , Badi Didi (1669) and Manjhalee Didi , etc movies have been made also.
The famous writer of the Hindi Vishnu Prabhaakar has written the biography of the Sharatchandra which is famous by the name of the Awaara Masiha.
Rahul Sankrityayan is viewed as a nomadic writer in the Hindi and he is also called wanderer.
He has composed the enormous literature in that there is inclusion of the story, novel and books of the history, society.
Rahul Sankrityaayan who is given the honour of Mahapandit were a prominent author of the Hindi.
He was a prestigious multilingual and in the early in the 20th century he gave the contribution in the field of the travelogue literature and world-philosophy writing.
He is called the grandfather of the Hindi travelogue literature.
His research on the Buddhism is considered epoch-making in the Hindi literature, for that he had travelled from Tibbat to Srilanka.
Despite that, he wrote a travelogue on travelling in the Middle-Asia and Tibet, which are very important in the literature perspective.
Ghumakkar Shastra is his famous book.
He asserted whole life with the creativity, quest, thinking and change.
Politics was not his work field but the interest of the Rahul was enamored towards the Communist Ideology also.
The counting of Rahul was among the world ` s great thinkers and intellectuals.
The credo of the life of the Rahul Sankrityaayan has been remaining wandering or mobility.
Wandering for him was not a practice but religion.
In the modern Hindi literature, Rahul Sankrityaayan is known as a travelogue writer, historian, archeologist, world changing author.
He is considered as a prominent author of the Hindi.
Rahul Sankrityaayan was a Brahmin.
He took birth on 9th April 1893 at Pandahaa village in Ajamgadh District of the Uttar Pradesh.
His childhood name was Kedarnath Pande.
Due to death of mother in his childhood his upbringing had been done by his grand father Shri Ram Sharan Pathak and grand mother.
In 1898 for the primary education he was sent to a seminary of the village itself.
Rahul Jee was married in the childhood.
This marriage was a transitional event in the life of the Rahul Jee.
In reaction of that Rahul Jee left the home in adolescence itself.
Running away from home he became saint in a monastry.
But due to his wanderer nature even he could not stay there.
In the age of fourteen years he fled to Calcutta.
In his mind a deep dissatisfaction was there to earn the knowledge.
That ` s why, from here to there he kept wandering whole India.
Excursion of the country-abroad and writing was the favourite work of Rahul.
The literature of the Rahul Sankrityaayan is broad.
Rahul Sankrityaayan was the product of the period when under the British governance Indian society, culture, economy, and politics were all going through the transition period.
That was the period of the social reformers and Congress was in infancy then.
In the year 1930, after going Shrilanka he became initiated from Buddhism and since then itself he became ` Rahul ` from ` Ramodar Sadhu ` and due the Sankritya sept was called Sankrityaayan.
Looking at his wonderful reasoning and unique knowledge, pandits of the Kashi gave him the honor of the Mahapandit and thus he became Mahapandit Rahul Sankrityaayan from Kedarnath Pandey.
Pandit of thirty six languages Rahul composed the literature in the genres like novel, essay, story, autobiography, reminiscence and biography but most of the literature composed in Hindi itself.
Rahul was of the fact-finding and curious nature that ` s why did the deep study of the books of every religion.
He studied Sanskrit books during his journey of South Indian, Pali-books during the stay in Tibet, Muslim religious book during the traveling of Lahore learning Arabic language.
To understand Rahul as a litterateur it is must to read his political literature.
Even after the attraction towards the communist ideology Rahul did not remain single-minded.
Coming till 1916, his Inclination became towards Buddhism.
Getting teachings from the Buddhism, he became Rahul Sankrityaayan.
Due to fondness in the Buddhism he inclined to learn Pali, Prakrit, Apbhransh etc. languages.
Russian revolution of the 1917 affected deeply the mind of the Rahul Jee.
He was Secretary-General of the All Indian Farmers Society.
He travelled to Tibet four times and brought enormous literature from there.
In 1932 Rahul Jee went for the journey of the Europe.
In 1935, travelled to Japan, Korea, Manchuriya.
In 1937, in Masco during traveling he fell in love with the secretary of the India-Tibet Department Lolo Yelena.
And getting married there itself he started to stay in the Russia.
Rahul Jee had greater love to Himalaya.
He started to live in Nainital in 1950, making home there.
Here he got married to Kamala Sankrityaayan.
After few years of this He started to live in Darjeeling (West Bengal), but later due to suffering from the diabetes he was sent to the Russia for treatment.
In 1963, In Soviet Russia even after the treatment of seven months his health did not become well.
He died on 14th April 1963 in Darjeeling (West Bengal).
Due to his death Indian literature had irreparable loss.
Rahul Sankrityaayan was an intellect.
He was living in the deep discontentment of the actual knowledge, to fulfill this discontentment he was always ready.
He gave Hindi literature an enormous repertory.
Talent of the Rahul Jee was versatile and he was an extraordinary thinker.
He has done the important work by edition religion, philosophy, folk literature, travelogue, history, politics, biography, dictionary and ancient books.
In his compositions, coordination get to see of the belief towards antiquity, pride toward history and true vision towards the present.
It was only Rajul jee, who tried to give the integral perspective by imbibing the ancient and current Indian literature thoughts completely.
His novel and stories put completely new viewpoint in front of us.
During the period of the Tibet and China journey he reformed thousands of books and showed the path for its edition and publication, these books are in the Patna Museum.
The prominent author in the travelogue has been Rahul Jee.
Kinnar Desh Ki Or, Kumanu, Darjeeling Parichaya and Yatra ke Panne are his such books.
While reading this , we get the knowledge of these places of the country-abroad.
Rahul Sankrityaayan was the exponent of the traveler philosophy.
It was his assumption that travelling being the medium to free the human mind is also a the medium of the expansion of our own horizone.
Imbibing his experiences of the traveling, Rahul also composed ` Ghumakkar Shastra ` .
He was a wanderer who was in quest of the true knowledge and whenever it was tried to suppress the truth he turned rebellious.
His whole life was filled with the internal contradictions.
After reading the Vedant when he gave lecture against the tradition of the sacrifice in the temple then conservative priests assailed over him with sticks.
Despite of accepting Buddhism he could not accept its ideology of rebirth.
In the year 1974 as director of the All Indian Literature conference he refused to speak the early printed speech and the speech he delivered, that was against the policies of the Communist Party over the the minority tradition and the language issue.
Hence, he has to be deprived from the membership of the party, but even though his attitude did not change.
During this time period apart from any boundation he kept attached with the concerns of the progressive writing and contemporary issues.
Meanwhile, he emphesised to implement the Marxist ideology after measuring the concrete circumstances of the Indian society.
In his book ` Vaigyanik Bhautikvad ` and ` Darshan-Digdarshan ` he highlighted in this regard.
Eventually, during the year 1953-54 again, he became the member of the communist party.
During the year 1940, regarding the farmer-movement he was imprisoned for a year then during this prison-stay of the Devali camp he composed the book ` Darshan-Digdarshan ` .
After the quit India movement of 1942 coming out of prison, he was declared editor of the weekly magazine ` Hunkar ` which was published by the top leader of that time Swami Sahjaanand Saraswati.
British government, while adopting the policy of Divide and Rule issued an advertisement titled ` Fight with the thugs ` for four points in non Congress journals.
Rahul was the master of true personality and beside politics in personal life with the fact of the affairs this harmony of his personality always retained.
Rahul abdicated his marriage and family life which was done at the age of eleven years, some where inside him a revolution has emerged.
The life of the Rahul gives the message to the people of the whole world to know the world away from the boundary of the state of the country and motivates to take the ordination of the travelling oath.
Rahul Sankrityaayan always remained wanderer.
Since year 1923 his series of foreign visits started, then it ended with his life itself.
In his these travelings encouraged by the motivation to collect the knowledge travelings of Shrilanka, Tibet, Japan and Russia are notable.
He Reached Tibet four times.
He stayed there for a long time and reformed that heritage of India, which had become unknown, rare and forgotten for us.
Rahul came back from Tibet with pride and ample material from there, due to that it became mandatory to change in the many pre established values and conclusions related to the history of the Hindi language and literature.
Simultaneously, new horizons of research and study were open.
Rahul went to Tibet as an author, tourist and historian.
In respect of India his this work cannot be assessed less than Hwensang.
Rahul was multilingual but he wrote in his mother tongue itself.
He was a strong supporter of the national language for a nation.
Without language nation is dumb, it was his supposition.
He had never seen any kind of conflict in the growth and development of the national language and regional languages.
It was his supposition that development of Hindi as a language is possible on the foundation of these regional languages.
He used to assume Hindi as emergence from the Indian folk culture and classical background of the culture.
Rahul remained influenced for whole life from Buddhism philosophy and Mark,s communist ideas.
Assimilated thought of both of the Buddhism and Marxism was with him, on which basis he had cherished the ` sweet dream ` of creation of new India.
Mr. Rahul has made us viewed our heritage from his work and aroused the feeling of the pride among us.
Rahul is the writer of the 22nd century.
Due to his progressive thoughts, a person who fulfills the dream a century ahead.
Rahul how used to consider whole world his home after leaving home in 1910 again reached to his maternal village Pandahaa in year 1943.
Actually, in childhood due to his wandering nature after getting scolding from father he had decided that he will step in the house in the 50th year of his age.
Although when he reached to Pandaha then no one could recognised him but eventually an old person named Lohar recognised him and embraced him in his arm saying ` Son of Kulvanti, kedar ` with affection and wet throat.
Acquainted voice of an old person at his birthplace made Rahul enraptured.
Wandering natured Rahul Sankrityaayan were such a talent in universal perspective, who had equal hold over literature, history, philosophy culture and all.
Strange seer of the distinct personality, thinker, philosopher literature, author, karmyogi and precursor of the social revolution, Rahul has lived every part of the life.
This is the reason that his creativity is not pure fictional literature, but that is animated through society, culture, science, religion, philosophy etc. and which attacks on the conservative perceptions and becoming life-relative shows the path of struggle and movement by unifying progressive powers.
Such intellect had to go through with the condition like amnesia in the last days of his life and for the treatment he had taken to Masco.
But who has bounded the wanderer, hence in April 1963 he came to Delhi again from Masco and after the death at the age of seventy years on 14th April 1963 his journey from renunciation in Darjeeling to communism was completed but his wandering life philosophy is still alive among us.
Rahul Sankrityaayan has participated in the Non-cooperation Movement against the British Government.
In the personality of Rahul Jee there was no conservation like abstinence.
To know the past and infiltrate in it, to understand the current challenges and to fight with the problems, to cherish the dream of the future - this was the lifestyle of Rahul Jee.
Meaning of the past was for him not just to know the history, but also, was to understand and know the natural history.
He used the history in new meaning.
The view toward the history of Rahul Jee was antic.
He used to add in it the link of present and future.
For him history was not just the description of the ` events ` .
He used to find the base of the religious thought from it.
He had an enormous belief towards the enormous knowledge store.
That literature might be related to history or to culture, to spirituality or to reality - he used to examine everything like a researcher.
In his progressiveness there was a request to see the international and national perspective, the imposed foreign culture was renounceable in his perspective.
He was worshiper of his language, his literature.
That literature might be of Sanskrit, Hindi, Urdu or Bhojapuri.
Beside his mother tongue Bhojpuri Rahul has deep affection from all the mother tongues of the country.
Bhojpuri was dear to him.
Because it was the language of his soil.
He used to suppose folk-drama tradition as a carrier of tradition.
Folk dramas or folk platforms play their strong role in any public movement, this was the viewpoint of Rahul Jee.
That ` s why he composed the Bhojapuri dramas.
In this he named himself ` Rahul Baba ` .
In against of social inequality in these dramas and songs at many places, touching dictums has been said.
He brought these Bhojapuri dramas at the conceptual surface and voiced the sound of the social change in local-language.
The intense thirst and loyalty towards the public-awareness gave such enlightenment to the personality of the Rahul Jee that its assessment is away from the capability of any critic.
He was the supporter of the communal harmony.
He was the pundit of many languages.
He just not used to give importance to every language and their literature, but even used to tell to adopt that.
Rahul was an intelligent person and server of the social tradition.
The voice of Rahul was energetic.
He had the art to speak.
His speech used to be flawless and had permanent impact.
In Patna, Rahul Sankrityaayan Institute has been established.
Here, there is also a museum of the things related to him.
Author Prabhakar Mavache has written the biography of Rahul Jee and highlighted that part of his personality from which people were not aware.
This book had been published in 1978 for the first time.
Its translation was also published in English, Russian, etc. many languages.
The books of Rahul Jee have been translated in English, his creations have been popular also in Chinese, Russian etc. many foreign languages.
In 1958 he has been honored by Sahitya Academy award and in 1963 Padmabhushan award of the government of India.
Did you see that, always eats rubbish.
Oh great! What is being prepared mother.
Oh, it is a full moon night today, women from neighbors are coming, to sing the aarti, all the guests will come, dinner of everyone will be there, and see, how many works are left.
Oh, these two fat people will do the rest of the work.
Mother! Let ` s go, today I will get you somewhere to visit.
Ok, will you take me out, did not you get someone else to take out?
Suman! Give that pouch and take rest for some time.
Ramu-Shyamu, please come.
Madam! Please fry the kachoris.
See, how Mehndi in my hand have been designed?
Are you tired?
Are you very angry?
Will you not talk with me?
No, I don ` t have mood right now.
To make your mood right, shall I say something?
I don ` t want to hear anything from anyone.
Fine, you won, in the future don ` t stay hungry ever.
Mister! Pay attention , even she has not had a meal.
Suman! Come with me.
Where, Aunty Jee!
Come, we will talk with Prem about his marriage.
Yes, I think, how soon it will be possible I will bring the daughter-in-law in this home, come.
What are you thinking, Kumar Sahab?
The girl to whom you have given shelter in your home, today dreaming to be daughter-in-law at your home itself, taking advantage of the innocence of our Prem.
Someone does not gift the expensive pendent given by her father to someone just like that.
Kumar Sahab! Few people are expert at taking away the rights.
And Uncle! When I wanted to show her capability of hers, she slapped me on the cheek tightly.
Pardon Kumar Sahab! Pardon, if someone hand is behind this fraud girl then of her father, of your own friends.
You have just paid for the responsibility of your friendship, Kumar Sahab! Who behaved pridelessly is he, stain on the name of friendship, who left her daughter here intentionally.
Day after tomorrow is the birthday of Suman, don ` t have idea that what she will demand from Prem?
Live long life son! Happy birthday.
Aunty Jee! Shall I take tea for Uncle Jee?
Ok, will you make your father-in-law take tea by your hand?
Is it your birthday today?
What has been your age?
You are quite clever for the age of eighteen year.
See, I don ` t have any enmity with you, You had been given facility to live in this home, not any right.
From which right, from which right did you step in the life of my son, from which right?
Give the answer! I want an answer , give the answer.
I give you the answer.
Love of Prem has given this right to her, my decision to make her my daughter-in-law.
Kaushalya, this girl cannot be daughter-in-law of this family.
Happy birthday daughter!
You are crying, crazy! See I came, after finishing all the works on your birthday, to you, to my friend.
Oh, why is everyone so quite?
See Kishan, what did I bring for everyone?
Keep it brother.
Take this, eat the sweet.
Kishan! See, see I brought for you pen, is not this your instrument?
Bhabhi! See I brought for you saris, I brought all.
Anyway, every colour looks good over you.
Where is Prem?
Come Prem! Welcome my son.
I want to have some talk with you, father.
We will talk, son, but in your own cabin.
Come Prem! Sit on this chair and take charge of this company.
You are giving me punishment of which mistake, father?
Son! This is a gift for you.
From today onwards take your decision by your own.
I had taken a decision, father, to marry with Suman, why did you refuse that?
Kumar Sahab! Make him understand.
What will I make him understand, Ranjit Sahab! Even he did not see the outer world, which is heartless, is oppressor, how will he stand, he does not know even to walk on the road properly.
You don ` t know even Prem that how tough is it to earn ten rupees daily, how much struggle have to do.
Will learn? What will you learn Prem? You don ` t know even to learn.
Love makes us learn everything, Father.
Prem! Are you going?
But, our engagement is going to happen.
Please , don ` t go leaving me.
Ok, then come with me.
Are you thinking?
People who love never think.
Father! I am Prem.
Baujee! I know that you are angry! Father said you the pros and cons, I ask pardon from you.
Great, the father gives the wound and son comes to put ointment over it, comes to ask for pardon.
Go, go from here, before it that I will slap you.
Go son!
I have not come to go back , Babujee!
I have come to adopt Suman after leaving everything back.
Babujee! Mother has sent bracelet of token for Suman.
Suman! Go inside.
Eventually, what do you want? Why are you after making my daughter sink.
I did not come to give Suman havoc, but came to give all those happiness, which you have selected for her.
Will you give her happiness! In that shallow wealth of your father?
I will establish my own world, Babujee!
Babujee! Your anger is with my father, not with me.
Babujee! Look at me once; look, forgetting this that I am the son of Kumar Sahab.
Test me by separating my father ` s name with me.
Today, I have come to ask your daughter ` s hand from you as an ordinary boy.
How much do you earn?
What is your income?
Did you see, how does prick this question, how does it tear the heart.
Two thousand? In a month? Mister Prem! This is a hilly area.
Only, work of wood and stone is done here.
And this is not the tourist season even.
You are educated, why don ` t you go to the city and earn.
No, Rahim Sahab! I have to earn, in this village itself.
But, son! The Last batch of labors is also full.
O Sundar brother! Did that lorry driver come?
No Rahim Sahab! Waiting for him.
Let it be, son, let it be, it is not of your capability.
Stroke of the labor of a day made you tired.
Yet twenty nine days are remaining.
You have lost, return back, will be happy.
Take back, bracelets of your mother.
Manohar! Be aware, if you took even his name in front of me.
Why, Is not Prem your son?
I don ` t have any son.
What, don ` t you have any son?
Then, is Prem is orphan like me, Papajee!
Is Prem is an orphan even having parents?
You shut up! If you will utter a single word more even then I will be angry, please.
How are you, son?
O Chote! Bring a tea, special, sugar separately.
How are you Father?
Prem! All this, for what?
What do you understand , even if you will earn two thousand rupees , then will he make you married to his daughter?
No, All this is his conspiracy, to wriggle me.
Prem! Shall we race till home again?
Your car, I have brought with me, son!
Father! Cars have changed.
Fine, then will you stand with your stubbornity?
Great! Uncle great! You had won the faith of Kumar Sahab, is it so?
There was no any chance of doubt, today he made you helpless to bow down your head in front of these labors.
I felt ashamed even then, Jeevan, when his unqualified son had refused the love of my daughter.
I had never loved her, father.
But you had planed the love.
But I became insulted, Seema! By making true friendship with him then and today once again due to him.
Now it is our chance, Uncle!
Yes Jeevan! Till now Kumar has seen the face of my friendship itself, now will see the real attack of enmity also.
Babujee! Can I demand your daughter ` s hands now , can see the dream , can meet her up?
The condition has not been fulfilled.
Why Babujee! These rupees are mine, mother had sent the money, but I did not take, Suman ` s oath.
Let it be Suman! Bet was to earn the rupees, not the pieces of papers.
What would be worth of these rupees? These have been rotten, have been useless.
See properly, numbers of many among these has been erased.
From these rotten rupees, what can you give to my daughter?
Nothing, not even food of two times.
Baba! I don ` t want food for two times, Baba!
Karan! Where is my son?
If something happened to him, then I...
Why Karan Sahab! Why did you become quiet?
When a person does the wrong work, then at his face itself his action gets busted.
Say, where is his son?
I don ` t know his son.
I just know the boy who has made his status distinct from his father, on whom I have proud.
Oh, Uncle! Are you surprised, seeing me alive?
I am Hindustan.
Himalaya is knot of my borders, Ganges is swear of my sanity, on reference to date I am the friend of darkness and sunshine.
And on my ash these buildings rapped by the marble sheets are telling from the world that cruel, robbed me and kind fashioned me, immature chained me up and my loved one threw them off by cutting.
A name was Jalaluddin Mohammad Akabar among these beloveds of mine.
Akabar loved me, Becoming strong from the wall of the religion and rituals-rule, he taught to love humankind and for always embarrassed me.
This is the palace of the King Jalaluddin Mohamad Akabar and now among its walls few stories of past days retain.
Three hundred years ago from now, far from the comforts and luxuries of huge palace in this hot desert due to sun and heat, on the sand blazing like fire the lonely person who is strolling naked feet is Akabar-E-Azam.
The sadness of these eyes are saying that he did not see yet the smiling face of the child.
In the wish of the child these falter feet of Akabar are moving towards the mausoleum of Hazarat Shekh Salimuddin Chisti.
With this hope that due to his continuous prayer, God will give Akabar a son.
The wish to walk in this royal procession is of lonely Akabar-E-Azam.
Finally, destination arrived, and the king in front of whom the whole world was bowing head, bowed his head in front of a saint.
Ask like asking, God never refuses the prayer of his devotee.
Lift up your arm for prayer, saint will support you.
King of the kings! You have given to this saint world ` s all the precious gift from your treasury.
Made me hear the sounds who said Jahapanah! Jille-Ilahi, now make me hear the sound who says father.
O, master of the both worlds, don ` t make Akabar without name and trace in the world.
Congratulations! Congratulations! Congratulations to Jille-Ilahi.
God filled the lap of the queen, congrats a son like moon to Jille-Ilahi and successor to Mughal empire.
You have brought the news of the kindness of the happiness in the sadden life of Akabar.
Take this ring, as a souvenir keep it with you.
Swear of this scale of justice, whatever you will ask once in the life will be given.
Prince! This scale is not a thing to play for you.
Then, is it a thing to play for Jille-Illahi?
No , this scale is the souvenir of Hazarat Babar and memento of the Mughal kings ` justice.
Take this, you have to say this in the court, remember this.
The disobediences of the prince started to increase gradually, and he started to cross the limits of the discipline and obedience.
Mansingh! Make him wear iron outlay by removing the silk lap of the mother, take him and ward him in the hot-blazed storms of the deserts.
I am happy that Salim paid today for my blood right.
The honorable queen of the India.
No great King! A mother, just a mother and nothing else.
I did not know this, that queen Jodha could be so helpless from a week mother, could forget her position.
Oh, great king! Which kind of politics is this of Mughals, which does not let the mother wriggle even, does not let cry, whose son ` s blood is being floundered with this callosity.
Let him wriggle but don ` t let him cry.
If all those mothers would cry like you also, whose children are in the war field with their son, then Hindustan will drown in tears.
What! Were wounds of the Sahab-E-Alam not washed yet?
There is no permission to go inside.
Will wounds of the prince not be washed?
For fourteen years who kept bathing in the rain of the blood, he is still engrossed in the poem, how strange thing is it.
There is not the matter of wonder in this, if the words of the Umar Khyyam would be written over rough surface instead of golden time, then will its value change?
Then your king has thought whatever for me, must have thought wrong.
Take this! The whole story of my life wriggling in the outlay of blood instead of the coat of mail.
The story of the prince ` s life which is taken in the respect of the king is not more than my son.
The avouchment of the king remain safe.
Once again Prince put the flag of victory.
How many wound your prince has got himself to get this victory?
Enormous, hundreds of swords became blunt after touching the body of the prince.
Everytime, the sword of the enemy by shining was praising the strength of the prince and blood of Akabar.
I will examine the Salim ` s court of mail.
Instead of the court of mail, the prince has sent this message to you.
Congratulations to King for the return of the prince!
What are you thinking standing silently, God! Show me the face of Salim.
Jille-Ilahi has given order to Durjan Singh, that he must come back earliest taking the prince with him.
I want that the prince would come walking on the pearls.
Even this is less Bahar! On the name of Salim I give you every right to you.
My son is coming back home after years.
I will ask him from king for a few days.
He has seen the politics of the father, has not seen love of the mother.
O God! Show me that auspicious time, when my son would be in front of my eyes, and I will forget you for sometime.
In an uninhabited, outside the palace?
I have come to take a stone idol for the prince.
Idols made by me will not be liked by princes and kings.
See this , this the court of the king , every word came out from the king is justice , which does not have any hearing.
This war field, blood of billion innocent men and victory of a man.
This is, result to speak truth, death sentence.
What kind of arrow would be it which does not get through the heart, what kind of intelligence would be that in front of which the head of proud does not bow down automatically.
Then I will make such a statue, in its foot soldiers will put his swords, king, his crown and man taking out his heart.
The crown is put on by the hands of others.
Crown is of others, but strength is ours.
Someone would not come, Bahar! Are you not scared?
The crown does not remain over those heads, timidity would come near to those.
Is there intention to pluck the stars from the sky?
Sometimes stars crack down on the earth by their own.
But for the arrogant princes, a dropped eyes is enough itself.
Congratulation to the queen! There is still an 8th of the time in the morning, maid presents the last pearl of the night watch.
Pay the price for this pearl.
Who has hidden after seeing us, Bahar!
Did not hide, but has been hidden, Prince!
This is the claim of sculptor that when this idol will be unmasked then...
Say it without fear, sometimes claims are interesting even.
This is his claim that after seeing this idol soldiers will keep out their swords, kings their crowns and men their hearts, in their feet.
The claim of the sculptor has been moved away from the limits of the interest.
I want to see the arrogance of his skill.
This is the order of the king that the prince should not see this idol.
This is the saying of the court astrologer, that tonight, before moon will set down it will be inauspicious to see any idol for the prince.
The curtain will be raised in front of the king in the morning.
Maid wants permission to present a wish.
It is in stories that idols used to be unmasked by arrows even.
Shekhu! Stories could be changed in reality.
Jille Ilahi! The order will be followed.
Subhan Allah! It seems, like an angel has taken shelter in the marble getting down from sky.
Maid is not an angle, a human.
But who did force you to be a statue?
A stubborn sculptor of your kingdom, who does not want to come out from the curtain of the obscurity.
Sculpture ` s brilliant skill is certainly the praise deserving.
But why did you keep silence at the time when the arrow was shot.
Maid wanted to see that how stories turn into reality?
Very good! I praise your courage.
Queen, you include her among your maids and I give her the title of Anarkali.
This is Love, Bajee, people will listen it if not today then tomorrow.
Then why do you scare from disgrace?
I do not scare from my disgrace, I do not want his defamation.
It is not without danger to send the letter like this, prince!
If you will love, then fear will go out from the heart.
Mansingh! What is this?
Regarding the arrangements of the Ajmer province, papers are presented in the service of the superpower.
Is it not known to king Mansingh that I have given Ajmer province to Waliahad-E-Saltanat.
It ` s known, Superpower!
Then these papers?
Situation approached till here and did you not make realized the prince his responsibility?
Papers have been presented in front of the prince many times but....
But what, Mansingh?
Maid is reported.
Maid is wondered over the recalcitrant of the knife and have complaint from life.
Master! Give a more chance to impudent knife to pass through, lots of blood is there in the chest of the maid.
Bahar! What is there in the heart of the fire?
Silent stories of the night and some secrets.
And this is the reason that just after sun rise every light is been silent for always.
You have also tried to know a secret, reason to make you silent also will be this.
Now you may go.
On the side of the Salim, Anarkali will be the queen of the Hindustan.
Don ` t let be the crown of the head to the dream of the feet.
It has been.
I am seeing Hindustan of the Akabar-E-Azam would be in your approach.
The fate of the men of the Hindustan will be drawn in the locks of your hair, Anarkali.
And then where ever you see turning the head thousands of the fates will be shivering.
Talk with respect, Salim!
In the cell of the heartless king, Salim ` s Anarkali will not die, I want his stamp on this freedom letter.
Anarkali will not be freed.
Why not she will be done?
Silent, A prince should not forget his responsibility.
Which responsibility is that which could crush love in the heart also.
The order of the Superpower is Your responsibility.
I have a belief, the frieghtning darkness of the cell will not have kept remained that light in your wishes, which was at some time.
Darkness of the cell were less than the light of the maid ` s wishes.
Darkness will be increased more.
Wishes will be increased more.
Growing wishes will be crushed.
Justice of the Jille-Ilahi?
I don ` t want to hear anything, justice of the Akabar is his order.
You will have to forget the Salim.
Certainly, and not just this, you will have to make him believe that you never had love with him.
Beauty in the motion, aware, the queen of the world, beauty of the Kingdom of the Hindustan, Queen Jodhabai.
Grace of the pen, would be king of the kingdom, son of the king, prince Nuruddin Mohammad Salim.
Eyes in the worship, the whole awareness, the king, Jille-Ilahi, King, shelter giver Jalaluddin Mohammad Akabar is coming.
Your this daring love, this dance, this interesting way to explain certainly deserve my reward.
Maid had this expectation from the big heart of the master of the fate, Jille-Ilahi.
Jailor! Take this rude lady and put into the darkness of the prison.
Your presence is the proof of the disobedience.
Anarkali was prisoned and I kept watching.
Oh yes, is your TV is working nowadays?
O, I am coming to your home tomorrow to watch TV.
For tomorrow evening I have taken four tickets of Heros, for you also.
Oh, tear and throw it off, tomorrow evening getting a chance to watch Cosmos verses Mohan Bagan, Black Pearl, World ` s greatest player Pele.
Deepak! Friend, Just one remorse has been there in life.
Could not see him in flesh and blood, could not welcome him going Calcutta Airport, friend.
Then it is fine, bring Ratna with you also, then will eat dinner together.
Doctor Uncle! Come, come, how is your patient?
Oh, brother, a bungle occurred.
This happened that in the second dosage his fever went down, great, son was taking the tea.
Then what is the matter of goof up in this?
Oh, son! The patient will start to become well just in two dosage then the doctor will be gone from his job.
What happened to whom?
About your result?
The same , was scared of that.
Uncle! Your information was wrong, not fifteen percent, only tweleve percent has been passed.
I said, only twelve percent was passed.
Ratna! Come here, I ask result from her.
Total how many applications arrived?
All of total hundred seventeen, sir! twenty three are freshers, the rest people are experienced.
Throw the applications of experienced people in the dustbin.
Bade Babu! Due to being in the hands of these experienced people such condition of the country has been happened.
Where ever see, no any man could be seen on the chair below from seventy-eighty, that ` s why this country is not being able to run, crawling like a horse.
Yes Sir! You said absolutely right, sir!
But there is one problem in today ` s youth.
They have more interest in sports, on garments.
Whom clothes are you ironing?
Brother ` s, he has to go for interview from eleven ` o ` clock.
He will go for an interview wearing these clothes?
Oh, where are you from one year and where are you going?
Oh , our Jagannath , do you remember?
Nowadays he has become a social worker.
Going to take Kurta-Payajama from him just for a day, there is an interview.
Kurta-Payajama for the interview?
Hi hero! Whose work are you doing?
Friend, I am working in a mythological mystery, a suspense drama- who is the husband of Parvati.
Oh, friend! I forgot to make you meet, this is my childhood friend, bossom friend Mr. Prasad and about him there is no need to say.
Blood is coming out from this place of yours.
Yes, this is the makeup.
What is your opinion about Sunil Gavashakar?
Yes, yes, popular player of the cricket.
I apologies Sir! I have very little knowledge about cricket.
Bravo, my boy! I was frightening, uselessly.
Even though you were not a charted accountant then would have earned good enough working in drama company.
That is fine, uncle! But this mini Kurta, how mini Kurta will work?
This is of others, you make it of your measurement,.
Oh, no brother, that is the goof up which occurred.
People might be axing on their feet, I have put my feet over the axe.
There, I talked wisdom for the world that my father used to say that small Kurta must be worn.
Now, how will I break the order of the father?
Oh yes , Kurta is a little short.
I love with you , Mahendra!
Girl! Name of the husband should not be taken.
It should be said like this, O, Jee, do you listen.
Oh my God! Aunty! This is modern drama.
But what is the need there to do such an inauspicious drama.
If there is to do the drama then why don ` t you drama like Jay Santoshi Maa, Bhakt Prahlaad, is not it Brother?
Do you want to listen or not, are you going to listen?
Oh, what is the matter, Ram Prasad! It is not yet nine ` o ` clock and did you start to work?
I had come on 8 ` o ` Clock, Master!
Yesterday, boss had told to prepare the file of Ahuja and Ahuja.
Oh, for that what had been rushed for, there is a whole day, has not he asked for file in the evening?
No Bade Babu! My father used to say that whatever you are supposed to do tomorrow do it today and whatever you are supposed to do today do it now.
The thing you have said , at the same subject a poet from the new generation has said like this , do the todays work tomorrow , work of tomorrow day after tomorrow , son what is there to rush for , when we are going to live for years.
But you did not ask that who has written this poem.
Dispatch it today itself.
Yes, I have to go due to work, now.
You wait here, Phone of Mr. Khanna will come at 5 ` O ` clock , Very important phone , you talk to him.
Yes, yes; Yes, I send it now.
It was any of your neighbor ` s phone.
I am sorry! I will refuse.
No, no, health of your mother has been worsen suddenly.
Tell me first that how is your mother now?
Now it is fine sir! it is saying of the doctor that now there is nothing to tension.
But what problem has happened to her?
It was problem of breathing, it is not there now.
Oh, very good, yesterday if Govinda and Ashok Kumar were also there in the test match, would not it have been fun then?
Test match? I did not understand, sir!
Don ` t pretend! you damn liar, I am like your father and how did you dare to lie to me.
Is the old man is at home?
The, your owner, Bhawanishankar.
Who did tell you this that Bhawanishankar is old?
O, gardener! Whose name is Bhawanishankar, he became old just after taking birth.
You sit here, I call him.
It seems, Ramprasad has been stuck somewhere, but where has he gone?
I don ` t know, Dr. Uncle! Today morning he went out so early from the house that I could not know even.
From two days, you are looking very distressed.
I am also distressed, it seems from the talk of the Bhawanishankar that any man from his office has cheated him.
Brother came.
Brother! Doctor uncle has come.
Then now you need a mother, what?
O, friend! Your story is becoming very complicated.
I had thought this first that I will direct your story myself, but it seems that we will have to call any big hit director of commercial film because there is no logic remained in your story.
First wanted Kurta, then wanted mustache, then wanted a mother.
See, you think about the story later, first think about me.
I want a mother, tomorrow itself.
Then what is the problem in this, I say to Aruna just now, she will be your mother today itself.
Oh, have you gone made?
Why are you getting off your shoes, let it be.
Wow, how pious environment!
Please, you sit, sir!
You would have made your sari proper.
A very thank you, Mrs. Shrivastav! You did wonderful in the acting of the mother and saved from the crisis like mother also.
Keep this Ramprasad properly, now Ramprasad will die and Lucky Prasad will live, he will teach music to the daughter of Bhavani Babu.
Shall I make and bring tea for you Aunty.
Ratna! Daughter, come near to me.
See, in front of everyone you tell me aunty that is fine, can ` t you tell me mother in lonely?
It seems, have we both ever met before somewhere.
Yes, it does not seem to me.
What is your good name?
I am called Bhawanishankar.
Yes, I am called Kamla, Kamla Shrivastav, Mrs. Kamla Shrivastav.
It is strange, not just face only, it seems I have heard your voice even.
We must have met before.
Ok, ok, have you met with Mrs. Sharma from Khar?
Lakshama! With whom are you talking?
Mother! You came, mother!
I mean, did you come after taking a bath?
You talk with him mother! I come just now.
How are you mother?
Oh, not, It does not feel to eat.
What? Does not it feel to eat Dahi-wada?
If girl is refusing to eat Dahi-wada then it has two meanings.
Either she is becoming a boy from a girl gradually.
No-no, that symptoms are not shown to me also, then other thing is right.
What is the other reason?
Certainly you have fallen in love.
Is Lucky Jee at home?
No any Lucky Jee lives here.
I mean it from Lakshman Jee.
Ohho! Then you are asking about younger brother.
Are you Urmila Jee?
How did you recognise?
Chote Bhaiya does talk about you so much, does talk so much that you have been by hearted to me.
What does he say about me?
O, Jijajee! Jijajee! What are you doing here?
Sister is waiting for you there.
Yes, see that, that, waiting there.
Oh! What are you doing, I am in a hurry, open the door.
Oh, what happened brother! What happened?
See, I was going inside, one man called me saying brother-in-law and I stopped, closed the door gong inside.
Is this any manner?
It means that his need was more than you.
Then why is he coming to meet me today, again?
No idea, yesterday said all of a sudden that will come to meet your mother, have very important work.
Now these things does not please me, the day he will come to know then what does he will think about us.
What do you think, am I liking all this drama, but what to do?
One day, collect the courage and tell him everything.
No, the same day holding my ears he will fire me from the job.
But mother! Something must be done.
But I will not make this marriage, daddy!
My marriage is going to happen, daddy! And even you did not try to know my likes and dislikes.
I did not think it necessary.
What will you know that is your choice right or not?
Now I has been mature, daddy!
Have you become mature than me?
Why don ` t you try to understand, daddy! Perhaps someone else would be my choice.
Ohho! In your opinion, you have love with someone.
Is not your brother Laxman at home?
No, sir, but what did happen?
My daughter has run away from home, taking help with him.
I am going to inform the police.
No, no sir! Being kind to me don ` t do this, every secret will be disclosed.
Police will come and do inquiry, then I will not remain from anywhere, I will be trapped.
How will you trapped?
Bhawani! What is this stupidity?
I am your friend, trust over me.
Even I have some relation with Urmila, your respect is my respect.
If these questions can be solved raising blood pressure, then raise it fondly.
If I don ` t raise the blood pressure then shall I blew the bugle thinking of it that your favorite, rake, cadish, mustache less nephew has taken away my innocent daughter.
Then yell too much, scream too much, there is the benefit of Lakshman in this.
Oh, no, no, it became too much.
From where has it been more? From this much puries your uncle used to just start.
Always used to say, Kalindi! You speak much, eat less.
But, son! I could not fulfill his one pursuit, just after your marriage, I will fulfill it.
He was very fond off to eat Muglai Paratha of radish.
One day with the huge effort I made Paratha reading books for him, but just after eating first paratha he passed away on the table itself.
Son! Just after marriage, I will make such Parathas of radish for you.
No Aunty! Not the paratha of radishes, make me eat paratha of potatoes itself.
Sit here, Sahab will just come.
I am not the inspector.
He is not an inspector, then certainly will be some thief, shoplifter, punk, cadish.
What Sorry , this is the police station either there will be police here or there will be thief, shoplifter , punk , cadish, some saint would not be here.
No, I am a businessman.
Mother, make me eat food in a hurry, I am very hungry.
Oh, what is this, be a human and eat properly, first wash your hand and mouth.
The vehicle is coming, mother!
Oh, Vehicles will come and go, are you going to think something for shop or not?
Father has died doing labor that I will leave the shop for the son and son is after to be a guide.
Mother! Who ever tourist comes from Mumbai, from Madras, from Calcutta, Singapur, Hongkong, Rome and Paris, getting down at the station what does he ask, where is Raju guide.
Dharmveer Jee! After years the fate of this temple has awaken.
What is the name of this village?
Name of the village is Rampuri, my innocent.
From where have you come and where will you go from here?
It is not in our hand always to go and to come, friend!
Man wants, I walk here and fate takes draging there, thinks, I will go here, holding nose drags there.
Your words are the line of the stone.
Getting tired one day I called fate near to me and asked that tell, what do you want?
Started to say leave the arbitrariness, walk holding my finger.
Fine, I said amen.
Swamijee! I brought some fruits for you.
She was not coming at all, I said that a big saint has come, In the temptation of sight she came.
It was a time, Bhola! That I had lost faith in humanity.
Heart used to cry, the whole world used to seem like the enemy, but nothing happened which would not go in vain, there is no such pain which does not have a remedy.
What is the name of the daughter?
The magic of the Gods, this earth, this sky, this air, that mountain, this temple, I, you, Bhola and all are not the play of the delusion?
But the true thing is this, Maya, that the love which could be gotten from a husband, which can not be given by hundred step brothers and five hundred step sister-in-law also, did I say wrong?
Then take this, eat it like prasad, God will do well.
Pick up the reliquary and take the path of woods, Shastri!
What do you say Pandit? Come with me.
Let us also take the sight.
Let two of us nescient also do the pilgrimage.
What name had you told of him?
What will you do knowing the name, Pandit Jee?
I have come here to ask your knowledge itself, but you just sit, please.
When a chivalrous like you is standing then how this nutshell may dare to sit.
You have got good teaching.
Listen mister! It seems You are from here itself.
Can you tell, from where address of Raju Guide could be taken?
Why not, from any child, from any passenger, from any coolie, in fact, I say that you must ask from the train engine.
I am asking from you Sahab! From you.
If asking from any gentleman then ask properly.
Did it say to you to come in between?
Let go to hell the guide, I will manage without guide also.
You will manage, what will happen to me?
It had known, you are coming together, will be a problem.
Fine, we go in a hurry after washing hand-mouth.
It ` s impossible, Huzur! It will be the night while reaching there, then when will we be back?
To go there we should start in the morning.
Then its mean, did today ` s day go in vain?
Sahab! If day will be spoilt then which kind I will be, such beautiful things are here to see that...
I don ` t have time for useless things, I have come just to see the caves.
Perhaps you are forgetting that I am also with you and I also might will have interest besides those caves.
Yes, why not, see, is there any good library here?
Then drop me there and show the city to madam.
Madam will not go alone.
Where should I go first, Madam!
In the hell, but first let ` s go.
If they are supposed to go into the hell, then why do people come to Udaypur, Gafur! Do not, we understand it heaven?
Your statement is right, friend Raju! But sit silently for now.
This is the library of our city.
Yes, I understood, friend Raju! But you keep quiet.
But I did not understand.
See, if you are such a rude tourist that even it hurts you that your guide open the mouth then this is taxi, he is Gafur and this man is going.
Have you awakened? How is your health?
What are you doing here?
Did not you come in the night also?
Some more work came in front then...
Work? Which work came which is dearer than my life also?
Yes, he does not have idea that you...
Does not know? Must have understood that it will also be any false bravado that whatever I say can not show it doing.
Oh , you are standing here completely fine?
Did not you become happy?
But Raju has some thing else to me....
See Roji! If you are all right and could walk properly, then instead of calling me, you yourself could have come there.
I have not called anyone here and I had not wanted to go there.
Ohho! Why do not you understand, I don ` t have time even to breathe.
Who is responsible for the time, which was spoiled in coming here?
If your time is being spoiled in seeing your sick wife, then her life is being spoiled in living with you, who is responsible for that?
Tell me this first, that what is the meaning of taking poison?
In this new city what was the meaning to defame me?
What is that thing which my money can buy and I did not give you, even though you want to show that I torture you so much that you don ` t want to live.
You are a wonderful dancer.
You have this much talent then why did you quit to dance?
What should I say, this is the opinion of Marco that dancing-singing is the profession of prostitutes.
Where is such man with the good opinion and how did mingle with the fair dancer?
And what was the other way? A mother, traditional devadasi, how she would have taken out daughter from that environment.
See the fate, someone came in front also that is Marco.
He accepted me, did the grace, made daughter-in-law did obligation to me, such a huge house, many servants, huge money, huge name, this much comfort....
Did you see Raju! This happens, by driving motor on the road made for the donkeys and bull carts.
When get down from the road then comes with grace, but car has to see down like this.
I know how stubborn is she!
If she will refuse to go in the mid night, then I can not abuse in front of madam even.
Oh my friend, take half of the bedsheet.
Oh brother! It is very cold, Baba! Let me muffle also.
Raju! O Raju! Please get up and see.
If I was in her position, then I would have spitted thrice over the face of that idiot and then would have said divorce, divorce, divorce.
If this is your decision, then every woman will have shame over your life.
If a man does not establish then is there not some other way to establish.
Man cannot give happiness then is not happiness some other place in the world.
Marco is also unhappy with you, but he does not go and strike his head against the wall.
How does he entertain with the stone idols going in the caves?
Just because he is a man and you wriggle yourself because you are a woman.
It is wrong Roji! It is wrong.
Today your situation is like this because you did not learn to protest from this situation.
Either take this oath that the feet which kicks you will keep licking his sole till last breaths, if not, then it is not sin to get up and show your right.
Sin is to lay over here, to bear the torture.
It is a sin to give up from the life, it is a sin to live smothering.
It is sin to kill self while living, it sin to suicide, it is sin Roji! It is sin.
No one is someone ` s slave, no one is dependent on someone, name of the helplessness is a misconception.
Oh friend! Who is asking for orange, I am asking the address of Raju guide.
I told you that Raju guide does not live here any more.
He has eloped with a dancer.
It is your vacation from today onwards.
But you did not come during so many days.
O , do you go , or shall I chase away you kicking off?
Who are you to abduct me?
Now this shop is not yours.
O son of the Bapu, where are all the stuffs and how come this cash box is empty?
O, why are you strangling with a child, talk to me.
Your son has taken away my shop.
How peaceful is it now, did not you feel bad?
Raju! I did think, I will go.
I thought also.
You will not go, that ` s it.
I don ` t want to hear anything.
It has remained just one hour to leave the vehicle, are passengers ready?
Though, due to this girl there was a brightness in the house, but what to do?
Roji, Child! Do you know, the train is at four thirty, did you pack the luggage?
Oh, What is this? These clothes of yours are still lying here?
You know it very well mother that Roji is not going anywhere.
Whose radiant anklet chimes has tickled the youth heart, can someone tell me that where does the famous worshiper of the art, Miss Nalini live?
And may I ask, who does want to know this?
Yes, man is an ordinary guide, name Raju, work to serve the public.
And even the public, who like to increase their knowledge with outings.
Which kind of service, I become their eyes and present in front of them the scenery making colourful by my heart.
It might be that truth is adulterated with false and false with the truth, but what will you do, it is the time of adulteration.
Now a day without adulteration even ghee does not spread the smell and what to say about human.
How much adulteration will be there, it will be anticipated that much perfect.
Whatever, what story I also have started to tell.
I am sorry, miss Nalini is tired this time, taking rest.
You come some other day.
You? When last time we met, then you were addressing me with honor.
The last time when we met, then dancing was assumed as a profession of prostitutes.
I want to meet Roji.
Roji does not want to meet you.
Did you ask her?
See Raju! I want to meet her up once.
Mr. Marco! I am behaving decently with you, you go back decently.
If you will try to go inside forcefully,then I will be helpless to throw you out forcefully.
At this time what are you doing in my room?
No, speaking in sleep.
Nowadays, just in drunkenness Roji gets remembered.
In remembrance get drunk and in drunkenness do remember.
Fine go, now go to sleep in your room.
Nowadays you always say go, have you forgotten to say come?
Sir, there is a parcel on the name of the Roji Marco.
To take till the caves Raju Guide from the Udayapur helped me out, I am grateful for that.
But do you know Raju! That, till now not a single expert reached till here because this work was written in my fate.
I had remained to discover this, to understand its worth, to give its name and fame which should be its.
But don ` t wonder Raju, your name will also come in the book because you are the man who brought me here.
Can not Roji be stayed away?
I have come to try, will not you help?
I don ` t have any grievance with you, Raju.
I have this grievance that you don ` t have any grievance.
I want that you cry, yell, abuse me, offcourse give me one-two slap, but do something from that it comes to know that you care for me.
This much grace even you had done over Marco.
Around the heart kind of a fort has been formed, no trace does reach till there now, not of happiness, not of sadness.
You are free from my side, Raju, in fact, I am happy that you got the way to get the happiness.
Don ` t put me away, Roji, I will keep sinking more.
Please Raju! I have got very tired.
Raju! Which kind of joke is this?
If it was a joke then what a matter it was, no palaces are broken, no paths are met, no paths are bifurcated, the joke is this that this is not a joke.
It is necessary to do this farce.
The one who has become a farce, what farce will he do?
Come, I will leave you till the car.
Ok, now you go and change the clothes, I wait for you.
Waited for long, on such a path which is not your path to travel.
What has happened to you suddenly.
See, it is becoming the show time.
I thought, not just from the Nalini ` s home, you have flown from the city itself.
How did you come friend?
Not friendship, today duty has brought me here.
You did not do right, Raju, you would have done with someone else, but you should not have done such fraud with Roji.
When her income in lakhs was in your hands with her own wish then jewelry of thirty thousands were what the thing, in the greed of that you did this forge signature.
Who did say to you?
Who said to me, the whole city knows.
Raju! Where are you brother, now even dance ended.
Was chat done with Roji?
What have you done, Raju?
If there was the need of money then you would have told me, I would have sold out my jwellery, but why did you do so?
I used to think, any one will understand or not, Roji will certainly understand.
The fact is this Raju, that I did not understand you, you did not understand me.
Today I say you the story which my mother had told me don ` t know how many times during my childhood.
Once a huge famine occurred.
The chest of the earth broken, a single drop of the rain did not fall.
Animals-birds were dying due to hunger-thrust already, men-women started to die wriggling.
Even Deity got frighten that is god destroying the human kind?
This story is of that saint, who kept fast for twelve days continuously and made God helpless to rain.
How do you talk without continuation, sit here in front and tell what did happen?
Did villagers fight?
Did you rob the shopkeeper ` s shop?
During this bad day instead of supporting each other such bloodshed?
In this village do men live or licentious?
Go, go and tell that any single life will lost, then I will give away my life.
Bhola! What is all this crap?
I never claimed that I am a saint.
If I was also, even though will it rain starving myself?
These are the things about stories, even that of the stories of children.
You take back these villagers , make them understand that I have given the threat to starve myself , just to end up the nuisance.
And since this objective has been fulfilled, you people go back to your home and send for me something to eat.
Due to hunger I have worst condition, go.
What do you look expanding eyes?
Master! Be pity on us.
SwamiJee! This madam has come from America to meet you up.
Any big television company of there has sent her.
She wants to ask some questions from you, is there permission?
Swamijee! Do you beleive in fasting.
Forty crore people if take fast on a day then forty crore hungry stomach could eat one day food.
Swamijee! Do you believe that it will rain?
These people have trusted over me and now I started to trust over their trust.
Swamijee! This madam is asking that had you ever loved?
If it will not rain, then what will happen?
From the life I had run away becoming hopeless, that is chasing, calling back, promising for happiness.
The hope of the thousand poor will be washed off, there faith will be ruined.
Do you believe that it will rain?
You also started to become superstitious like these illiterates.
Raju! Did you start to think that hunger of a man may have any connection with the clouds?
I don ` t know Raju, complexities are growing.
I started to think such things I had never thought of them essential, but to think those are more essential than the life and death.
God! They are thinking me your child and how far away you are with me.
Not mine, hear them.
Take my life, take away their pain, God.
How free I am feeling today.
Like the body forgot to demand, mind forgot to wriggle-make wriggle, life is like in the fist, death is like a game.
It seems today every demand was fulfilled, but see the fun, today no wish has remained.
At least don ` t let go the desire to live.
Life became light by melting and truth is my form.
Body remain or not remain, I will remain.
Throw me in the fire, I will not burn, hit through the sword, I will not be cut.
Time of the auspicious timing is passing and you are sleeping.
Time of the auspicious timing has been passed away before the two and half hour.
What are you doing?
Idiot! Why did not guest arrive yet?
You had called twenty five, where are they?
Yes, yes, all of your twenty five have come.
My mind is telling that guests will certainly come, we wait.
Then what were we doing yet?
Always remember this, the hard work and honesty always get rewarded.
Waiting for three months not a single customer came, today you have been sawn, at least you come.
When did you come?
Did you get the work from ` Khabardar ` ?
Nothing got, just now coming after meeting workers.
How long it will go like this, think some idea.
How many times I have told you that it is just one, good salesmanship.
Now say, how many copies I will make for you?
Oh, I have not come here to be photographed.
Then, for what have you come?
I have come to take the rent of this shop, which you have not given to the house owner for three months, that.
Rent, rent, if you had come to take rent then why did not you tell me initially?
But when did you give me the chance?
What would I do? How busy we are that we do not get the chance , how many works , does not care.
You do this that you go, I will send you check just after the arrival of partner.
What was there the need you to show me that postcard of Hemamalini?
Take care of one thing, the every work of the ` Khabardar ` magazine is very secret.
Here, the secret of the big personalities of the city is disclosed.
Be aware from the Ashok of the neighboring photo studio.
Yes, I will be aware.
Because he is the man of Tanreja.
Who is Mr. Tanreja?
He has made this studio so that he could spy against the Khabardar magazine.
