Before talking about the role of media in public movement , it is more important to clear the understanding about the structure of media .
Today , the meaning of the media is from the complete structure of the information system .
In that structure , newspapers , radio and electronic media -LRB- group of channels -RRB- are there .
Today when a huge part of the information system has come under the control of industrialist groups then who will be benefited if you will debate about media than journalism .
If journalism will be there than for whom , on this subject strong debate should be done .
Capitalist media have changed journalism now into profession and business .
In this bad period , professional journalist started to shout for media instead of journalism .
Cleverly they want to make us understand that they are not sustaining the faith for journalism , for that they are not but media is responsible .
Reporter , sub editor or editor working in newspapers , channels are first off journalist and he must accept the challenge of awareness of journalism ` s responsibility .
The government takes action on the basis of information received by the media than faith of the general public toward the media increases .
That is the reason , in India ` s rotten democratic system media is still very important .
Assume that reporters of country ` s every newespapers and channels walked out for a fortnight .
If the media will be more loyal to power , bureaucrats , businessmen and capitalists by neglecting the conditions of the public , then the negligence of public movement is obvious .
In Capitalist democracy where the whole parliamentary system is being developed on the condition of the negligence of the public , in that nation traditional media should responsible for the public , though such aspectations are obvious but are more emotional .
In India what is the status of the public in this capitalist democracy which is being developed under the connection of the parliamentary system and bureaucr y ?
With the slogan ` kar lo dunia mutthi me ` Ambani group who is after possession of whole country ` s natural resources appeared as a wealthiest clan of the country in a decade .
This family has first invested his money in many big newspapers and channels and now they have ownership of many media clan .
They encroached forest of five thousand acres , even encroached the millionth acre land and oil-field of Krishana-Godawari besin - but it ` s impossible to publish and broadcast news against them .
I never understood that why an anchor , who gets 60 lakhs to one crore money from a channel , wants to make an intellectual reputation by writing essays in newspapers which supports public opinion .
Eventually why newspapers , by making channel ` s anchor write essay are after to declare them a great journalist .
It is just because the newspaper in which mister anchor is published , the editor of that newspaper becomes blessed by entering in the Chanel ` s panel .
Demolition of editor ` s tradition is not just like that , it has strong political reasons .
Prabhash Joshi may be considered as a successful editor because he started a track of public journalism from Jansatta .
But Prabhash Joshi may be considered as an unsuccessful editor even because he lacked the political understanding to fight with dangers over journalism in coming future .
Jansatta of Prabhash Joshi is being published .
Condition of the Indian express group the owner of Jansatta for now is not bad , editors and journalists are getting their salary then why Jansatta has started to neglect the pub c ?
The newspaper which established the power of the public ` s right through news is why more loyal toward government than public .
In India , history of channels is not very old .
The news network of channels has flourished in these two decades of new financial liberalism .
Past of Indian Journalism starts with the foundation of public-journalism and newspapers have played a vital role in this foundation .
Brick of foundation is sliding itself and you are wondering by looking at building .
Now instead of research-journalism philosophical-journalism is more important .
Punya Prasun Vajpeyi , Raajdeep Sardesai , Barakha Dutta , Raveesh Kumar are the greatest journalist of this era .
Ask them straight questions that against of turning on bulldozer over slums in Mumbai with the slogan ` save home - make a home ` when Medha Patekar kept doing a hunger strike till ten days with thousands of devastated people then how did they take this n s ?
They don ` t have hatred from Medha Patekar .
Hatred from those slums , which against the wish of builders since a decade stand even tried to be devastated .
Media groups are looking at news of strikes , public movements as the food stuff instead of issue than what ` s there to surprise ab t ?
Journalism would be there then it would be for public , and business of media would be there then it would be of benefit .
You aspect of public support from the media based on the science of benefit then who will answer your complaints .
Those divine journalists don ` t want to turn their camera toward 600 villages of homeless tribals in Chattishgardh .
Their cameras don ` t dare to face the fact of more than a lakh homeless tribals migrated from Dantewara - Bastar and became refugees in relief camp of Andhra Pradesh .
If they can ` t meet up Soni Sori in Chattishgardh jail than they could have even met in AIIMS -LRB- Delhi -RRB- .
If it ` s painful to meet up Soni Sori than call that S . P. and present in their own public court , who put rocks and stones in the genitives of Soni Sori as if it was dustbin .
Truth does not die by curtain the truth .
The fact of Soni Sri has revealed now in front of the nation .
If the campaign for justice to Soni Suri will be run by Anna Hazare and Arvind Kejriwal then what benefit these poor fellows will get .
Eventually what does become the responsibility of Indian journalism for adhibit justice to Soni Suri .
You are giving to accused S . P. salary , position and dignity whereas imprisonment to victim .
Which kind of country is this , which kind of legislat n ?
We should not leave the base while talking about journalism and media .
A channel is a spectacular view of invisible waves passing through open sky to which you can ` t imprison by holding in your hand .
This is a transition period of Indian journalism .
Emergency of Indira was a trial period of Indian journalism .
Even at that time for benefit newspaper ` s industry did not have name media .
Than journalism was like that if Khushwant Singh was that side then Kuldeep Nair took the stand this side .
Indira locked Kuldeep Naiyar in jail and demonstrated her power .
Journalism certainly get affected during emergency but for the right to express a huge group of journalists went against dictatorship of Indira .
In 1990-1991 a new era of capitalization , globalization and economic liberalization started .
New liberalization rolled in then the Mandal Commission rolled in .
With the new liberalization and Mandal Commission progressive forces has been demolished much , during that period of dispersion in 1992 commotion of Babari Masjid occurred .
Riot in Gujrat occurred in 2002 .
Now I am talking about journalism through demolish of Babari Masjid to Gujrat riot by standing in that desert of a decade , because our whole base has slipped during this period itself .
During this period every brick of the foundation was taken out under our feet and we-you remained silent .
Economic liberalization gave wisdom of liberalization to journalism .
When progressive consciousness of society started to rapture then inside media groups corporate clan attacked on journalists ` trade-union .
Without progressive scientific consciousness you can ` t talk about trade union .
Wage board journalists were forced to enroll in the contract .
Until they were together , they kept protesting against the contract .
For enormous comforts it should have enormous money .
Their own revolutionary brothers were killed in imprisonment , there past was progressive , what does it mean .
They accepted the gift of contract journalism by quitting wage board .
This is the era of contract journalism when the moral power of journalism died squirming in its own den .
Contract-journalism broke the backbone of journalism in many parts and folded it .
The editor - journalist will be without backbone then instead of journalism media clan will be more loyal to benefits .
Downfall of journalists who named capital liberalism as the Renaissance or era of development , will call the magic of the communication revolution to the weakening of newspapers and powerful condition of the channels .
Employees of The Times of India went to supreme court to get the due amount on wage board than on 15th July 2011 , administration extricated all of its 44 employees of printing press and closed its printing press .
In front of the main office of The times of India at Frazer road in Patna all 44 extricated employees are on strike since 21 months .
From the death of assistant Secretary of Dinesh Kumar Singh , who lost his life in lack of treatment while walking out , management was not shaken then why will our journalism be shaken .
But for the mainstream media it is not in their priority to make news for still going strike of media workers since 21 months .
To give direction to the media , India Press Council is a prestigious semi government institution accoutered with legal rights .
Justice Markandey Katju announced while accepting the responsibility of press council ` s chairman that he will prove that Press Council is not a toothless tiger .
Now its going to be almost two years and Justice Katju did not take any step to prove Press Council as a lion who has teeth .
Katju brought Press Council in the limelight with his controversial statements but during this period Press Council did not take any step which was considered as if this step will be helpful to save journalism .
A fact finding team which was constituted for condition of media in Bihar , its councils ` s authorized report has not been published yet .
Before that Mr . Katju made report public to journalists by mailing it up by himself .
If it will be case against newspapers then Press Council has to take indifferent action .
Justice Katju did not give any statement to media to play the public supporting role , to cover the news of tribal people ` s extermination in Chattishgarh or to cover the news of public movements any how .
The parliament of a nation which has lost its dignity , it may be ignorance to trust much in press council an organ of the parliamentary system of that nation .
Look , if it will be journalism then news of public movement will be breaking news of the nation .
But journalism will be from the media operated by the businessmen then the characters like Anna Hazare and Arvind Kezriwal will be presented as great leaders .
We would not be cheated by airs of Anna and Arvind .
It seems to us that if public movement gets media coverage then certainly support of the nation comes in favor of that movement and it creates pressure on the government .
But public movements ` dependency over media is even lethal for Public movements .
If you are daring to do movement in the hunting era of imperialism and capitalism then why do you think that capitalist will give you respect .
An editor who lost his commitment to journalism will not be taking care of his newspaper ` s public reputation than from that whose interest will be ser d ?
From a small ray of hope light could spread till far .
Number of people came on road and involved directly in the movement of Anna Hazare , people much more than that debated and supported on networking sites like Facebook and Twitter .
These debates are called soul of deliberative democracy .
Since few last months it has gotten to see that on social networking site people are either supporting Anna Hazare or criticizing government .
On the other hand , it tried to connect everybody through the slogan given by civil society ` India against corruption ` .
People in lakhs registered in support of the hunger strike of Anna by replying through missed calls of an SMS , it has been seen as a successful campaign .
This is definitely a historical incident .
First time such face of media came in front that people made environment without coming out of their home and played some of their roles .
Is this the reason that since last few years the media which was staying away to cover the news related to the movements started to cover movements primar y ?
Is the media doing this by observing activeness of people on social media , because like before is it not possible to ignore the iss s ?
In India it occurred exactly at the same time , when the fire of revolution was fresh in the Arab world .
At every step , from mobilizing of people to legalization of the election , role of media is crucial .
The initial survey of such roles of media has been done in 1968 during the Vietnam war in London .
Like this in 1980 , Tod Gitlin in his famous work named ` The Whole World is Watching ` had manifested the power of global journalism to influence the emotion of public during wars .
It has been called as a fourth pillar of society by looking at power and sovereignty of media .
By looking at the immense power of press to exchange of awareness and consciousness in society and the propagation of ideology and infinity , English philosopher Edmand Berk has called it fourth pillar .
Later Macualay confirmed it that how and why press becomes a fourth pillar .
If we talk about newspapers than their power is always indisputable .
In one side Napoleon had understood the power of press brilliantly , on the other side being ahead of time a great man like Mahatma Gandhi had published the papers like ` Young India ` and ` Harijan ` .
This power of newspapers incarnated first time in Europe but even the rest of the world understood the importance of this power sooner .
Hence it is called that printed words make the history .
If we pay attention to the different periods of time than its not like that it was only eighteenth and nineteenth century ` s media which was useful to get or give publicity .
Today in twenty first century power of the press has increased immensely .
Popularity of Harry Potter series has got emphasis due to its capacity to be talked from Gardian to Washington , almost in every big newspaper .
Every newspaper publish some special stuff for children and hence trouble did not come to keep the magic of Harry Potter among children and teenagers .
Even social media emphasized it .
Like this to stimulate the revolution in Egypt with all other circumstances social media also played the important role .
Police killed by beating one businessman named Khalid Saeed than one group was formed on the Facebook on the name ` We all are Khalid Saeed ` .
This group drew the attention of people remarkably and very soon four lakhs people became its follower .
On the other side , on Facebook a lady named Aasmaa Mehfuj appealed people to gather at Tahreer Chouk and to protest .
Aasma got huge support on Facebook and this Facebook campaign motivated people to gather at Tahreer Chouk .
These two incidents became very popular worldwide .
It was popularized mostly by social media itself .
These were general public those get into their different political characters .
Now in mass media the way has open for general public to participate .
A thinker Marshal Macluhan has mentioned television as a great achievement of the twentieth century .
Today these topics are being more relevant because the internet has provided different opportunities consistently , which could be seen as an alternative of mainstream media .
If the power of the press is surveyed from initial printed form then an important name of journalist Andrew Rebman also comes up .
In year 1798 Rebman had designed main page of a German calender .
Rebman was a member of Jacobean club and used to live in a city named Maze .
At this point even it is quite interesting to know that during that period India ` s Tipu Sultan also used to be a member of French Jacobean Club .
Rebman on its main page had made the picture of the revolutionary mob entering into Fancis Basteel beside a fort .
It is called that press runs down big castles even .
Any movement needs support of the media .
Earlier newspapers used to have limit that those were not approached to another countries .
Today situation has changed due to coming out of internet edition .
Perhaps the peculiarity of new media is that its democratization has been done .
It may be issue of news creation , question of news publishing or issue to have open discussion about it .
Whereas , in social media participation of the general public is more than professional people , hence anyone could talk about its language or standard .
Active people of social media don ` t have any professional pressure hence blog writers could show more gut .
Few people look at this vital space of media as an alternative which could be challenging for media organizations those working for government support or corporate benefits .
Now the power of Newspaper -LRB- press -RRB- is being voiced by many movements .
Media and newspapers introduced their strength consistently from ` save the Narmada ` movement of the Medha Patekar and ` Rigt to Information ` movement of Aruna Roy to present mobilization for water-forest and land .
It was not passed many days when ` Jal Satyagraha ` of Khandwa had been came out as a great topic for discussion on social media .
Today , there is no objection to accept it as a fact that if newspaper -LRB- press -RRB- and social media put their strength in public benefit works then progress of society and civilization can increase by fourth times .
The first thing is that press works to get political support for movements .
Secondly , journalism legitimizes any movement and makes it give the status of necessary consideration .
The third and last matter is that it broadens the limitation of struggle and the platform of globalization .
In fact , good or bad media coverage of any movement can make it live or dead in a public point of view .
Many times , media by taking initiative makes any movement real and massive .
A good example of this was a raised movement in Belgium to catch a murderer on 20 October 1996 , in which three lakhs people have participated .
In fact , by considering the number , it was the biggest movement of Belgium which had been named as a ` White March ` .
English government had tried hard to limit the public meetings and had put boundation on Indian press to stop the propaganda of awareness at this matter .
In the tradition of our press , history of coverage of movements has been always magnificent .
It can be understood by an example .
Whenever the issue of examples of suppression done by government arise than the name of the Barisaal conference comes in front of us prominently .
On April 1906 police attacked relentlessly on a provincial conference organized at Barisaal and many volunteers were beaten brutally .
Today when with the demand to clean Ganga anyone like Swami Nigmaanand sacrifices even his life then vitality of a serious discussion on social movement figures out itself .
Even this important question is also figured out that how different are the strikes of Nigmaanand and Jatin s ?
Is this difference about quantitativeity or qualitativeity relativity with power .
In our country still basic needs of maximum population are food , cloth and shelter itself .
It is a different matter that according to the maximum percentage of media today these needs are bike , Pepsi and mobile .
This absurdity will also have to be taken care , then only in movements the investigation of the role of the new media could be done in comparison with traditional media .
When in 1897 Lokmanya Tilak was arrested then he put a great example of bravery and sacrifice in front of government .
He refused to apologize in front of government , because of that he had been sentenced to eighteen months rigorous imprisonment .
Like this a journalist had become a live symbol of nation ` s new spirit of self sacrifice .
Like different countries , many movements have occurred at different point of time in our country .
Movement or revolution produces the stir in the country and society .
Some movement reaches to its extreme means get its objective .
Some movement raises as a tide in the country and comes down like a foam .
Movement is necessary to change the rotten system of a country and society .
Change is the universal law of nature .
Some movement limits among few people and confined regional boundary .
Its echo is listen world wide , is talked for years , decades .
Few are registered in history , and few remained buried between layers of dust .
The public are artery of a movement .
Our country ` s independence movement was also a public movement like that .
The beginning of any public movement starts with an individual .
This pioneer person has a vision , a mission .
He is able to earn the public belief .
He has capability that he can unite people , can make them agree with his point of view , can operate the movement .
He connects people with his thought , his dreams and becomes leader of the revolution .
Many people dream like Martin Luthar and King Junior and to accomplish that lead the way of public .
Leaders of freedom had dreamt about the country and society , that was nowhere .
Simplistic western model of Nehru ` s development was not ideal for our country .
The public was miffed and at that time J . P. blew the revolution in the entire country .
Like Gandhi he invoked the students for the revolution .
Thousands of students left their school-colleges and joined him .
A reason of failure of this revolution was no involvement of farmers of a farming country like India .
In the decade of eighties liberalization and globalization grew out of and time and society has recoiled .
After eighties India participated in the run of globalization .
Government became slave of American policy .
Under the influence of capitalism society has been pushed to simplistic model of development .
In the name of establishing big companies Tribal ` s rights began to be robbed .
From them to snatch their land , their rights , plot started to be created .
Now a days , people are aware due to education and media .
They are not ready to leave their right eaisly .
In hindi cinema number of movies have been produced on the subject of different movements , some did well and some did not .
Among all these it will be intresting to watch two films , one is ` Hazaro Khwahishe Aishi ` of Sudhir Mishra and other is ` Chakryavyuh ` of Prakash Jha .
Both show the attitude of youth , and are connected with the movements of those periods .
Both movies are produced in the 21st century but one represents the later half of the 19th century and the other represents the first half of the 21st century .
Hazaro Khwahishe Aishi ` of Sudhir Mishra is a story of seventh decade of 20th century and Chakryavyuh of Prakash Jha represents the first decade of 21st century .
Whereas Sudhir Mishra had completed his movie ` Hazaro Khwahishe Aishi ` in 2003 itself but it could release in 2005 .
By showing brutality of emergency this movie runs with three youth characters .
How youth anger meets with a tragic end , how revolution is crushed , this movie is a live example of all these .
At the end of Prakash Jha ` s Chakravyuh what he has made told by Boys Over that is the fact of now-a-days and is a great assumption .
Today , quickly growing nexalism has rooted in more than 200 villages .
Thousands of armed nexalites are indulged in a bloody war with the army of their own country .
Not a single day passes when land of India is not blazed from the blood of its own child .
Why not getting the way to come out from this vicious circle .
This is the reality of the shining India that there are just few people possession over 25 % income whereas , our half of the population are forced to live on 20 rupees daily .
Disbelief and anger born due to this difference is increasing and time is slipping from our hands .
In the decade of seventy , educated youth and farmers were observing that government in the pride of its power was torturing them .
Just for the sake of name , landlordship had been ended , lands had been consolidated but the reality was just opposite of it .
Suppression of government crossed every line to wipe off their trace .
Many youth like Rajan sacrificed for this revolution .
Nexalism movement did not end up but they lost the clear vision and it scattered .
Few elements became a puppet of selfish hands , few are still attached with this conflict with loyalty .
This reality of India is still in existence , in one hand affluence , in other hand poverty .
In ` Hazaro Khwahishe Aishi ` many guys fell for Geeta Raw -LRB- Chitrangda Singh -RRB- who came from Britain but She already has fallen for Siddhart Taiyabjee -LRB- K . K. Menon -RRB- carefree son of a judge .
Son of a Hindu mother and Muslim Father Siddharth lives in aristocracy , consumes expencive drinks , takes marijuana .
He has remorse about it and he satirizes that he does not know Hindi even he can not speak Bangla .
He feels himself comfortable with English .
On looking at inequality of society he has inclination toward naxalism .
His values are more dear to him , he leaves his love for his principals .
To give his thought practicality he arrives Bhojpur a village in Bihar .
Till now Sidharth who was running horses in air , sudden face with the truth stir him to inside .
He becomes the victim of cruelty of Police .
His friends drive him from hospital .
Geeta wants to bring change in society through education and wholeness .
In beginning Sidharth mocked on her thoughts and work , he does not feel that society could be benefited with this .
Geeta by staying in the village starts to do other works for education and social welfare .
Movie represents attitude of youth of that era in a very realistic way .
Sidharth ` s belief from revolution shakes up .
He becomes victim of police torture .
After arresting Geeta and Sidharth Police tortures them badly .
Sidharth after leaving everything goes to britain for further education .
He feels that right now the public is not ready for revolution completely .
Geeta who is spending secure life decides to help villagers by her own way and stays there itself .
It could be seen in both ` Hazaro Khwahishe Aisi ` and ` Chakravyuh ` .
They have one friend Vikram Malhotra -LRB- Shayanee Aahuja -RRB- in Delhi ` s Hindu College .
He loves Geeta , without accepting it clearly .
Vikram respects his Gandhian father and also remains irritated from his lifestyle .
He does not feel that His values have any worth to society .
He keeps giving donations to his friends for their party .
Ambitious Vikram is not of a bad heart .
When he comes to know that Geeta has left for Bihar again and it is unsafe there for her than he goes Bihar for her .
There , instead of Sidharth he is smashed by police brutally and loses his mental control .
Among the green field of farms violence and cruelity , it was converted into land of exploitation and torture .
Cruelity of police is still there in fact new techniques have been inovated .
General public frisson from the name of the police .
This movie by holding period of five years -LRB- 1969-1976 -RRB- showing the exploitation of emergency sometime symbolically , sometime directly .
This movie is the mix version of love , ambition and politics .
Every one knows that storm blew in the whole country in the decade of seventies subsided quickly .
The whole country has been handed over to middlemen and brokers .
The places had started to convert into hotels .
The deviation of Sidharth from principals is based on fact .
In movie ` Hazaro khwahishe Aishi ` acting of Chitrangda Singh , K . K . Menon is outstanding .
To look Chitrangda Singh at the character of Geeta on screen is a nice experience .
She reminds of Smita Patil again and again .
This was the first movie of Shiney Ahuja and he got honored for it .
After the eighties , in the wind of liberalization every gimmick was used to capture the land of people .
This time tribals are united .
They are not ready to leave their land .
They are firm to pay for their rights by sacrificing their life .
The government wants to finish them off on the name of Naxal-terrorism .
Prakash Jha is very well aware of social-political conditions of Bihar .
In 1984 , by making ` Damul ` he had broken the monotonous trend of Hindi cinema .
He has made many movies like ` Mirtudand ` , ` Arakshan ` and ` Rajneeti ` .
It is not easy to make a movie on the subject of Naxals .
Naxalism is a complicated subject .
Everyone is aware of from the role of the Naxals and the government .
Daily news comes about them in newspapers and on television .
Kabir Bedi suits in the character of the owner of the project Mandhataa -LRB- like Vedanta -RRB- and also his son has acted well the character of foreign returned Indian .
Khan is clearly a Muslim and he has been presented in the pose of offering Namaz , in Bihar Khan title is there even in Hindus .
Name ` Kabir ` is common among Hindu and Muslim both hence its tough to explain that Kabir of the movie is Hindu or Muslim .
Today directors who make movies on social issues even can ` t stop themselves in use of item numbers in movies , Tigmanshu Dhuliya is the great example of it .
Even Prakash Jha could not stop himself .
In ` Chakravyuh ` movie item song is a complete misfit .
The film has suffered loss due to Sameera Reddy ` s ` Kunda Khol ` .
It is okay that from this scene clue of the character of area commander Naga -LRB- Murli Sharma -RRB- come out and Panchayata sentenced him for that but this could have been done even without item song .
Perhaps this spice was necessary for the audiences .
In beginning Kabir is person of a strong character , does not tolerate wrong .
That ` s why he quits police training meanwhile .
Adil Khan was upset with him due to this .
During Collage reunion Kabir cajoles Adil .
Later to help Khan he goes to Naxal ` s place .
He tries to make his friend Khan Understand , wants to make him aware of the reality of Naxals and other parties .
As a spy of the police he enters in the Naxalite group and after knowing their honesty and intentions he becomes their itself .
He is disappointed due to hurting his friend , not to be Naxal .
He acknowledges the displacement in the name of development and progress .
He understands the difference between the values of powerful and powerless people and listens to his conscience .
From beginning to end ` Chakravyuh ` movie runs like a thriller .
Background of maximum movements of India is land .
Even in ` Chakravyuh ` clear reason of the movement is land .
Since 1831 Tribals have been fighting for their land .
Earlier they were fighting with foreign government now after freedom fighting with government elected by them itself .
To vacate land of tribals for industry has become a fashion now , in that government is also involved .
In ` Damul ` Prakash Jha does not talk about terrorism directly , in the course of time today lots of things have cleared .
Hence , ` Chakravyuh ` presents the revolution openly and film discloses the crooked tricks of industrialists and politicians .
Both could fall for their selfishness to any level .
The film shows that to establish the industry state government helps the industrialists in shifting of tribals whereas he has been elected to serve the public .
In any condition politician wants to save their position and they know it very well that it could be saved by the industrialist ` s mercy .
Economic-political tie up wants to remove the tribals from their roots .
The quality of ` Chakryavyuh ` is that it keeps the audience engaged till the end .
Director Prakash Jha has complete control over his subject .
If compare from the Jha ` s film ` Rajneeti ` then the work of Jha is quite good in this .
Songs of ` Hazaro Khwahishe Aishi ` is the soul of it , songs of ` Chakravyuh though are good but did not leave the impact .
Bhikhari Thakur is a famous lyrist of Bihar , songs created by him was once on every body ` s tongue .
Number of plays have been written based on his life .
Shantanu Moitra has given the dulcet songs of both of the movies .
There are slow songs-dances in ` Hazaro Khwahishe Aishi ` whereas there are fast songs-dances in ` Chakryavyuh ` .
Use of folk songs is the peculiarity of Jha .
On comparing Title song of ` Khwahishe ` in powerful voice of Shubha Mudgal left Jagjit Singh far behind .
A folk touch gives a height to the movie .
In the music of ` Chakryavyuha ` , there are the contributions of Aadesh Shrivastav , Salim-Sulemaan and Vijay Verma also .
As the singer Shaan , Sunidhi Chouhan , Sukhvindar , Kailash Kher and many more have worked .
Shiny Ahuja got the award of debut actor and film had gotten the award for the best story .
The film had displayed in many world ` s film festival .
Tribals have decided that without fighting they will not give even an inch of their land to any prosecutor .
Revolutionaries of ` Chakravyuha ` are ready to kill or to be killed , even though whatever result will be .
They say that this land is theirs , they are born there , will live there , will die there .
In ` Hazaro Khwahishe Aishi ` people who came from outside are fighting for villagers .
This movie does not portray the contribution of local public whereas in ` Chakravyuha ` people those are fighting are Tribals themselves .
We will have to fight with our own , this is the message of this movie .
Sudhir Mishra even believes that It is the responsibility of the director to try to spread political awareness among public .
He has believed that till political awareness will not develop inside us , we will be the victim of conspiracy of political system or industrialization .
He accepts the challenge and works with creativity .
Prakash Jha and Sudhir Mishra both face the truth with bare eyes .
They present the problem and simultaneously expose the root of the problem .
Period of the seventies has been presented with slow motion , till that time public of India had not started to hassle .
` Chakravyuh ` movie could be seen in motion .
Both movies present the differences which came in the genre of the film with the course of time .
In ` Khwahishe ` Sourabh Shukla has done brilliantly the character of insensitive , shrewd police man .
Like ` Khwahishe ` even in ` Chakryavyuh ` police just does not arrest the Juhi but also rapes her brutally .
In real life , this ugly face of police is seen regularly in newspaper and television .
Now police has modern arms and helicopter , they use that to finish the Naxalites .
If compare this movie with the movie of Jha ` Raajneeti ` then this movie is proved better in every aspect .
The progress of Jha could be seen in this .
On the basis of ` Chakravyuh ` , the movement now occurred in singer could be seen completely .
It is well known to everyone , in Singur industrialist has to run away after wrapping up their project .
Looking at the condition of the nation today it seems necessary to have a transparent war in real .
Today ` s youth don ` t believe to run away like Sidharth but believe to hold on and fight .
Both movies show the reality of their time and society .
Shyam Benegal who makes films on social issues believe that social change is not the motivation of film , but certainly it shows the mirror .
To watch both of the movie is like to live in two different eras .
The irony is that in the both eras , society is moving on the path of progress and on the other side attitude is 5000 old .
With the birth of the tribes the need of communication was felt .
Among the members of the family or clan with their inter communication symbol , language and script was emerged and developed .
This development was done very slowly that it can not be connected with a particular time period or a particular place .
Even the emergence of traditions , rituals and beliefs were taken place simply and very slowly .
Demand of the time gave birth to many inventions .
In the world how many primitive species exist today , among them still oldest form of mass-communication is in use .
Due to the development of speech and language , landmark changes occurred in communication resources .
King or heads of tribes started to make their oral announcement by beating drums , gathering people .
Organization of function , festival , fair , etc . were even for communication hence during the meeting exchange of information could take place .
With the development of language development of literature took place and structure of religion , tradition , social ceremonial system etc . started to be clear .
During the Vedic period to control the society sages established the ethical , regional and social law and tried to spread it by putting all these in literature .
In this era yagnas were hosted for mass-communication .
While cruising itself sages used to convey one state ` s information to other states .
In the Mahabharata , the description of war by Sanjay is the great example of a communication system , but such examples are very less .
Stories which have been told in the Mahabharata , those have been told by many sages hereditary .
At the time the stories were medium of public communication .
In front of people presented in Naimisharanya ` Sut Jee ` told the story which was said by Vyas Jee on the occasion of Janmejay-Yagna .
Vyas Jee did not compose all stories of the Mahabharata but he got it in heredity .
Due to lack of printing presses Brahmans used to memorize Veda , Upnisad , etc . and used to transfer to their successors .
In Puranas Narad Jee has been portrayed as a reporter , public relation man and correspondent who establishes the connection among different Gods-Goddesses , interchanges Informations .
Instead of drums he selects Veena as a medium of communication .
Position of Sankracharya is uppermost from this point of view .
He built four monasteries in four parts of the country and established a networking of information-communication in whole country .
Reliability on sages was more , hence sages used to get more respect than kings .
First time during Morya period Ashoka built the extended road .
Planted the trees by roads , built the inn and well and bring forth the established post service .
In many countries Ashoka posted the apostle , their work was to communicate with people .
During Mourya period and Gupta period services for the communication grew intensely .
The attempts were done to unite Hindu-Muslim , but the whole country divided into two main communities and even public communication was bifurcated .
Mullahs for Muslims and Pandits for Hindus worked to give the collocution respectively .
The result came off that between them mutual distrust increased .
In Mugal period Nakkars had been used to send the message .
From Agra to Delhi on a certain distance 20-25 Feet tall towers had been made , above them Nakkars used to place .
By changing the code of information Nakkars used to play in a specific way and information used to be conveyed .
For communication traditional medium to beat the small drum is still in use .
In the Mahabharata the fake news of death of Aswasthama was broadcasted just to ruin the moral of his father .
With the industrial revolution the whole world stirred .
Revolutionary changes happened in the system of communication .
With the development of the printing press resources of communication grew intensely .
After printing photography added a new chapter .
Awareness toward literacy increased and qualitative growth in the people ` s personality took place .
The darkness of superstition stepped aside and prudential thoughts developed .
In 1852 train service started .
Train and roads did not just connect the places but established the connection among different castes , creeds and religions .
Britishers used these resources to carry arms and militants and in our country it was used to connect people , this followed that we won and Britishers were defeated .
After freedom importance of the role of communication was accepted and medium of transportation and broadcasting was developed intensively .
Through radio , movie , television , telecom , telephone , newspaper , etc . tempo of communication has been increased .
To get the victory on obstructions of time and place satellite broadcasting and computer are being used .
Though in our country percentage of literacy is quite low but still it has achieved success in the field of communication .
In modern era information is treated as a matter .
To acknowledge the modernity and realize the modernity knowledge of environment and scientific move is compulsory .
Instead of formal education medium of communications have helped to spread the casual -LRB- informal -RRB- education .
For the word ` communication ` instead of communication conversation has been used intentionally .
In communication technical aspect is quite strong whereas in conversation information has been kept in focus , thus for ` mass-communication ` ` jan-samvad ` terminology has been accepted .
Communication is name of meaningful connectivity among people .
In Mass-communication this circle gets more extended .
But this communication should be purposeful .
Through the medium of intercommunication person ` s opinion develops and ordination emerges which makes possible the formation of an established society .
This conversation at initial stage remains materialistic .
In animals through skin-touch communication or contact occurs .
Due to power of senses animals receive each others languages or symbols .
Human has senses and heart even with the sense organs , hence he is more sensitive .
Sensation of animal-birds are expressed through senses or organ ` s effort , which becomes the medium of connectivity .
systems of communication through symbols emerged due to incompleteness of sense ` s communicati .
Hence at the first , development of speech occurred after that language and the later development of script occurred .
In conversation both the parts are active and exchange of opinions are direct and immediate .
But in the condition of group communication answers do not come immediately .
Need to put efforts to know the reaction of groups .
But this conversation system is just not a communication , information or request but it accomplishes the deep and dense objective .
But mass-communication is not a self motivated process .
For certain objective it is used through scientifically agreeable process .
In this model five parts are there and among these five parts there is a strong connection .
If one link broke then process of communication could be ended .
The last link of communication is most important .
Even in this model almost similar elements are there hence transmission of information and evaluation of its influence with its acceptance .
The important objective of mass-communication is to measure the public reaction .
This work is quite tough .
In modern era many researches are being done in this field and its impact is being measured by many institutions .
The important responsibility of mass-communication is even to hand over the culture and tradition to the coming generation so that in social life obvious progress remains and the system maintains .
Mass-communication mediums influence the general public and get influenced even .
It must be understood clearly that to be influenced is not to be changed .
In our country traditional values are very conservative that communication medium barely influences people and People who gets influenced it is not easy to turn them in a certain direction .
When population take the violent and aggressive form then it becomes the perspective of the mob .
In this , every kind of people get involved and unsocial elements take the benefit of the mob .
Many violence could be inflamed by instigating emotion , speech , slogans , etc .
The community which takes interest just in listening and is not the follower of any specific thought process , comes under general audience category .
This community appears to collect information or to know the reaction or to listen religion preaching , etc .
Small groups or communities itself influence the people in social life .
Family , clan , class , caste , community , linguistic-group , organization , association , etc . are such kind of groups .
Among the members of these groups there is strong connection and relation and have boundation to support each other .
It is opinion of Mac Luhan that instead of information and knowledge Communication medium has more importance , means instead of message , media is more important .
The psychology of people points to this issue that importance of attractive media is more then message or information .
For example , people like to watch some drama in the form of a movie than to watch on the stage .
It is the opinion of some scholars that position of information is higher than medium .
The medium is just a technical instrument which is the attraction of one-two months or of a small time .
The main part is information or program .
It is the opinion of some scholars that like intoxicated elements make a person lazy and lethargic , similarly communication mediums make a person lazy and inactive .
Most of the people does not take information and education of communication medium seriously .
The main reason for the change is a communication medium , but economic and social needs or presser bears the change .
But the fact is that values practiced in society are more successful to change or influence the medium .
The main role of communication mediums is to provide people broader view , to open the window of wisdom .
Some people also have expressed such thoughts .
Communication mediums have played a vital role to demolish accepted values .
Due to providing information more openly , in early age boy-girls start to behave like adult and lack of politeness , generosity , sensitivity appears in them .
The main work of communication mediums is also to play the role of physic .
Through the medium of programs , by giving entertainment and motivation mediums save society from many types of turbulence and quarrel .
Communication medium exchanges through different medium and also try to give something new through imitation .
From the newspapers many thoughts get the place on radio , T . V . or movies and even newspapers also get something from these mediums .
Any news or information which may be telecasted , must be clear .
No doubt or debate should be related to that .
Sometimes information itself is confusing and it could not be understood properly .
Information should not be incomplete otherwise it will be hard to accept it .
The source of the information should be right so it could be accepted easily .
The real news only gets the public acceptance .
Information should be brief hence it could not be forgotten .
People don ` t have patience to listen or read elongated news and it is also hard to keep them in memory .
It is not enough just to broadcast or to give information .
Whatever information is being given related to that information of the public ` s reaction or influence should be gathered immediately and later changes should be done .
Generally communication medium doesn ` t take care of their listener , viewer or readers ` tradition , interest , perspective and starts to preach them .
Since scientific inventions brought the vital changes in production , distribution , communication and government ` s work , hence the change in society was obvious .
Due to broader changes in production and distribution the definite changes occur at the level of interest , fashion , language , outfit , living standard , hence the visible change occurs in social life .
In traditional society dynamic changes are not possible .
Hence , to change the society at first it is necessary to change in the economic field .
To bring the change , with the external pressure public ` s desire and acceptance is also important otherwise change would not be stable .
Through mass communication transfer of society ` s intellectual property is possible and people get benefits from the stored knowledge and experience .
Communication medium , while delivering news or information gives such suggestions from which huge population could reach to the solution of any problem and could take some decision unanimously .
In the field of medical the revolutionary achievements happened in our country , credit of those goes to medium of mass communication .
Behind these events certain moral and social values are there which motivate people to think in the right direction .
Sometimes people don ` t believe in both of the mediums .
That condition is unfortunate even .
It is attempted to change the traditional system through mass-communication .
Because of that for some time period it seems quite unusual to public .
It ` s obvious to grow attachment with the accepted values since centuries , hence at the time of changing this attachment becomes an obstacle .
Sometimes in the name of ` public interest ` many important news are hidden or are presented after manipulation .
Hence , question mark raises on the reliability of mediums which do not have a good impact over public opinion and public consent .
In mass-communication mass and communication are important .
In fact , objectivity can not be achieved impersonally because even he is a person who fabricate publication matter or produce news .
How particular a person is , his own perspective and thought also involve in that conversation .
This person can not be excluded completely .
In the greed of to make the news more interesting newsreaders try to add herbs or spices .
While doing this they forget about issue of reliability .
To make the facts colorful , it is not fair to form it partially .
Before broadcasting the news it must be investigated perfectly .
Sometimes big mistakes are done due to simple inadvertness or lack of investigation which break the reliability of the whole medium .
From where ever the information comes , It must be investigated .
There are even some other reason to influence reliablity .
Political parties , religion , community , caste or other such groups when develop their own communication medium then it is obvious to have partial perspective .
Whatever information stuff is sent , that does not reach to its target as it is and is not accepted as it is .
It is necessary to study about the elements influencing the public consent .
How quickly people accept any dialogue , this thing is important .
If the public would not have taken any news or information profoundly or with liability then question of public consent was not arisen .
Just to hear the news is not enough .
Rather it should be meaningful and attentive thinking , reading , listening or philosophy .
Sometime he listens all the dialogues but he does not take benefit of it due to not listening with concentration .
This matter is most important .
Acceptance power and receptive power are most in an educated person because he is mentally ready to accept any information .
Potter can not make pots with dry clay .
He has to prepare clay by mixing water with it .
Popular politicians or schemes have public consent with them .
Sometimes through vital advertisement some scheme is popularized so it could get public consent .
It has been tried to make family planning more popular , because of that it has gotten public consent .
Public consent takes the form of public opinion .
If there are willpower and determination behind consent then that consent becomes opinion and expresses in a form of social power .
Through voting this power takes the form of political power and has potential to turn whole society into a definite direction .
Political parties run many movements to make their scheme popular and put lots of effort to motivate public .
Parade , speech , celebration , conference , etc . are hosted and to influence the public the broader public relation program is done .
The success of any campaign depends on the issue that how a group accepts it or supports it .
Group ` s favorable reaction helps to make public opinion favorable .
Some time significant movement does not become successful in lack of public consent .
In our country number of movements related to development could not be popular .
Adaptability of cultural environment should be emphasized predominately .
Conservations of Habits , interests , education , tradition , religious emotions , castes and communities should be studied in this respect .
Impact of belief and superstition in rural area is vital , hence instead of breaking it instantly people should be made aware about its whole consequence .
Whichever public opinion emerges in a huge group , that emerges due to the leader or head of these subgroups .
To the formation of public opinion few events contribute extremely .
Through such events people get lessons and because of those their opinions are formed .
During the time of independence number of epidemics were in our country and many families suffered the loss of lives and commodity .
About removing widespread superstition of pox and about vaccination a favorable public opinion squared up , because the fury of pox was removed by vaccination .
In public opinion , leaders of sub groups play important roles .
These leaders or dominant person keeps in constant touch with their group , hence people from that group even accept his wrong words immediately .
Gradually if many groups express the similar opinion then that opinion takes the form of public opinion .
Public opinion , in comparison of public leader is more prudential because in this inclusion of whole group ` s wisdom is there .
This is like a general desire of Ruso which is addition of group ` s good desire .
The opinion of public leader is not the opinion of public .
Public opinion remains in the state of hibernation and expression of public opinion does not occur till some specific event does not occur .
Whenever any incident occurs in which there is chance of dissatisfaction , tension , crises , etc . then people express their opinion .
At the moment of peace its not necessary to express the public opinion because to express the opinion there must be some important question .
No public opinion is expressed on very general questions .
Public opinion is expressed to finish any problem , crisis or discontentment .
When any situation does not have a proper solution then few persons have to be influenced by unfavorable decision .
When a dam is built over any river before that most of the part of that area dips down in flood .
Even people of that area do not want to move away from there then too they have to move away from there .
When use of such remedy becomes mandatory in which disregard of public opinion becomes mandatory then remuneration or compensation is given to affected persons .
The internal public opinion itself sometimes comes out externally .
When Public opinion is more clear and strong then it does not limit just to express opinion but takes the active form .
Due to this activeness , revolutions arise .
Whatever revolutionary changes occurred in Russia-China , Bangladesh and other countries , a strong public support was behind those changes .
Just a strong public support could do revolution and could change the society .
In the socialistic countries such public supports have declared their influence .
In democratic countries just public opinion -LRB- support -RRB- does not become functional power because it has to constitute a Lokshakti .
The power of public opinion invokes the change in society .
Only public can change the society .
Sometimes many movements influence the people but can not bring any fundamental change .
Influence or awareness should not be taken as a change .
To influence a person is easy but to change him is a tough job .
Sometime it is easy to influence a person but when that person becomes a member of a community then behaves distinctly .
If this influence is logical and under the public resources then this this influence may take the form of change .
Hence we should look out that impact may get the form of change otherwise whole effort becomes fruitless .
Work to give density , stability and practicality to the process of influence should be done skillfully otherwise any movement will not bring the social change and will remain just an advertisement .
Purpose of advertisement or propaganda is not the social change but to get the instant benefit .
Mass-communication can not go beyond a certain extent due to diversity in language , religion , caste , region , etc . in the country .
A harmonious or simple community like ` mass audience ` is not available .
A event does not have a similar impact over contradictive sub-groups .
Generally people ` s mind set is not regarded and such programs are telecasted those are not acceptable to massive population .
Perspective of Public of rural areas is more rigid and traditional but the programs , those are broadcasted for them are more close to modern tradition .
In the most regions people oppose forwardness and transition .
Our tradition is anti transition tradition .
There is a trace of truth in talks of Gandhijee .
It means , transition is not eligible over and over again .
Only a change for welfare should be accepted .
Every change is not auspicious .
Hence , while bringing change we should take care of this .
A revolution could bring even crises .
In educated community transition is accepted as a natural process .
Sometime these programs are quite boring that it does not have the proper impact .
The success of the programs depends on the presentation of the programs itself .
The receptive power of the audiences also should be taken care .
Even due to excess pressure people adopt the cold attitude toward new programs .
While telecasting capacity of the audience must be taken care of .
It takes quite long to change , hence should not try to get results immediately .
We have haste to judgement and without giving enough time we conclude and when do not get the desirable results then get disappointed .
In the process of Industrialization the revolutionary changes happened in the resources of mass-communication .
Before the printing facility whatever mediums of mass-communication were there , those were effective at the regional language and level .
Development of a public-culture has become possible due to advance mediums of mass-communication otherwise culture of our country is more regional or local .
Due to regionality or locality our cultural stream has miscellaneous attributes .
Culture of every state or region has their own peculiarities and their own colors .
History of journalism begins with the dawn of the 19th century .
Although in the beginning most of the newspapers were published by Britishers and were published largely in the English language itself .
In 1821 Raja Rammohan Roy first started the publication of the weekly `` The Bangal Gazett `` in English language but this magazine could run for just one year .
In 1823 , newspaper , three in Bengali language , three in Persian language and in one in Gujarati were published .
Rules amended by Metcaff had been regulating newspaper till 1856 .
But East India Company did not give recognition to the liberal perspective of Metcaff .
In 1857 a new act formulated , in that pre consent was supposed to take on publishing matter .
Criticism of government , protest against the system , to inflame violence , such other issues were controlled .
In 1867 , again an act was formulated in that to take pre consent was made mandatory and even registration of newspapers was made mandatory .
After the revolution of 1857 , reign of the Company went on the hand of the British Kingdom because of that many acts were formulated so that the British reign would be least criticized .
In 1885 Bhartiya Rashtriya Congress was established .
At this period , in every part of the country newspapers were published in English and regional languages , in which most of the editors were British .
Only editors of the regional language newspapers were local people .
British government implemented strict restrictions during first world war .
Newspaper of Anie Basent ` New India ` vocalized the demand of ` Home Rule ` .
Editor Benjamin Horneemen supported the demand of ` Home Rule ` through his newspaper ` Bombay Chronicle ` , in consequence of that Aniee Basent and Horneemen were relegated from the country .
The Rolet Act of 1919 was firmly protested and all newspapers criticized the British government .
During this period Mahatma Gandhi started his Civil Disobedience Movement , which got massive public support .
The Meantime Swaraj Party was established and few other important newspapers came into limelight .
Among these newspapers ` Banglaar kathaa ` , Swadesh Mitram ` , ` Prataap ` and ` Basumati ` were predominant .
In 1942 ` Quit India ` movement started .
Second world war was also going on .
To get freedom Indian newspapers started a huge campaign through the press .
The role of newspapers is vital in getting freedom because to suppress the voice of press British government tried a lot .
Whatever act were formulated by Britishers against the press , most of those were dismissed but the press act which passed in 1951 had many provisions to control the press .
Hence this Act was firmly protested , due to that in 1956 the first press commission was established .
After getting freedom journalism has developed adequately in the country and also development schemes have got publicity through newspapers .
In the country newspapers are active in the private field .
Central government and state governments publish few magazines so that newspaper ` s perspective could be balanced and these criticisms could be denied .
Even the objective of keeping radio and television under the control of government is to boost up the balanced policy of broadcasting .
The main purpose of journalism is to give information and to present informations in the form of news .
Whatever is the fact , it takes the form of news when it relates to the massive human-life .
Ordinary events or activities do not become news till they do not have particular purpose or reference .
Initially it has been just like daily description but in the 10th century it got the form a business and theories of journalism were developed .
Hence news and facts are not the similar thing .
Sometimes news exposes the fact and sometimes even put a curtain over it .
A successful journalist is one who has good connections and publishes the press note given by the government immediately without thinking about it .
Statement of British journalist Lord Northcliff is that `` that news is great which attracts the reader `` .
Distinct movement of the press movement is on and still this controversy is not sorted out .
Just not in our country but in all democratic countries this battle is on .
Sometime in America this question is asked that `` Who speaks the truth ? or government .
Once an interesting event happened with the American president ` s press secretary .
He entered in the journalism after serving in the Presidential House for few years .
After a few days one person told him that they can not trust him because he served the government and now he is a journalist .
In the news there must have readablily , freshness , unbiasdness and reliability .
Area of news can not be confined .
Any subject could be news , if it is related to human life or human interest .
A journalist should be fast , fit , aware and interested in literature .
He should be a book lover person who establishes proper networking , endowed with an attractive personality and always in fit clothes .
He should not easily believe on press publication and must investigate that from his own side .
He should know the art to carry the formalities beautifully and should be well disciplined .
It is right that a journalist has to face many difficulties during his life time .
Resentment of criminals , threatening of administration , anger of police , financial problem , lack social prestige , etc . are many limits those make life of a journalist uncomfortable .
But beyond these limitations the people who accept this business feel proud about themselves .
Even though he does get much financial benefit but the impression of a journalist remains in the whole society .
Police , public , government , public or personal enterprises all are scared from journalists .
Position of editor is above all in the success and utility of newspaper .
The potentiality of the newspaper is evaluated by its editorial .
Perspective of whole newspaper or magazine glances in the editorial .
On which topic editor brings forth clearly his opinion , suggestion or criticism .
His viewpoints are bold and clear .
He can ` t write good thing to make both parties happy .
He has to put his idea logically and many readers make their opinion with the opinion of the editor .
In fact editor thinks about reader class and deliver his opinion .
Responsibility of editor is biggest , hence he is the most important part of the newspaper .
Information and broadcast ministry has established the photo division which sends photos of the important people and achievements to the newspapers and magazines .
Every newspaper and magazine has distinct photo division which compiles the suitable pictures for the news .
Photos are given utmost importance for the political news and news related to special events .
Rather standard of newspaper-magazine is assumed by the pictures published in that .
Some commercial magazines are continued on the power of these colorful pictures .
A photograph creates an attractive news in itself .
General public has more attraction to show medium .
Hence to use this medium is mandatory .
In our country number of photography journalist is quite less but this genre is developing .
A person has right to get information and press has to decide it .
To present the information objectively and impartially is the virtue of the press .
It ` s main duty is to save the unity and wholeness of the country .
In India workspace of press council is limited and to save the benevolence of newspapers it does not have enough rights .
It can not give the strong judgement against the press .
At the most it could put in a word for to take back the facility of advertisement publishing in newspapers or accreditation .
Whichever news agencies are in the world are mostly foreigner and our government does not have direct control over them .
In our country P.T.I. , U.N.I. , Bhasha and Univarta are main news agencies .
In the country , the newspaper industry has grown fiercely .
In every small or big cities , different languages ` daily , weekly , monthly , fortnight , yearly newspaper-magazines are huddling around .
Every year almost three-four thousand newspaper-magazines are registered .
On the financial perspective , condition of newspapers might be not good but to earn the social status and power this medium comes in the second position after politics .
Now the first demand of a literate person is newspaper .
If anyday newspaper is not published then it seems unusual to a person .
This boundedness and dependency are the symbol of this thing that in the country newspapers have played an important role to bring the revolutionary changes .
In the last of the year 1992 , press registrar had registration of 29423 newspapers-magazines .
Every year there is need of almost 5 lakh metric tonnes of papers for newspapers , among those we are supposed to import 2 lakh metric tonne paper .
Machines , etc . are also supposed to be imported .
In 1990-91 almost machines of rupees 2.25 crores were imported .
For short and medium newspapers , Indian state business corporation at the low cost makes available papers for newspaper .
Due to disaffection among owners and journalist better services are not available .
Advertisements have been deluged in the newspapers .
Hence less place remains for news , information , literature , etc . and have an adverse impact over customer ` s interests .
Limitation and form of advertisement must be restricted otherwise it will be tough to pose a good impact over reader ` s attitude .
Publishing of nude pictures on the name of beauty , art and modernity might give the financial benefit but can not preserve the cultural values .
From the technical point of view press industry has gotten the huge success .
The role of the press in the democracy is not less then opposition party .
In one side press provides public support for government laws , other side protests against the system to insure justice .
Few people take protest , disagreement , rejection or criticism as journalism , whereas the role of the press is creative and positive .
Role of the press could be important to convey the voice of poorest to government or officers .
In our country Indian newspapers have played the positive role on the events from freedom fight to China-Pak war , freedom of Bangladesh , general election , flood-draught , etc .
To raise the voice of victims in the field of corruption , injustice , nepotism , the whimsicality of officers , political-economical corruption , victimization of women , etc . newspapers are quite successful .
Newspapers provide precious matter on the subject of religion , culture , literature , celebrations , sports , miracles of science , etc .
For the development of the country it is important that in the commercial-social events there should be participation of the general public .
For the participation instead of physical participation mental participation and consent is more important .
How effective advertising will be for the plannings of government , public opinion will be in favor of those plannings .
Now a days through newspapers schemes get publicity like an advertisement .
Still general public has doubts over advertisements because he doubts about the quality of advertised object .
If newspapers promote government schemes creatively then could influence the mindset of literate people .
Literate people itself influence the decision of the general public .
Literate people discuss about the news with other people .
Often it has been accepted that readers will not read news related to development .
This is the situation that every youth takes interest in the development of the country with his own development .
He does not look at the news just for entertainment , he wants to know that which schemes are there for the development of his and other people .
In our country , the tradition of the mass-communication has been coming since ancient period .
This tradition is very popular and prosperous that even today its importance has retained .
To influence the folk life , trend of the arts of the folk genre , literature , music , drama , etc . have been developed before the Vedic period itself .
Evidence of this fact is available in the Prehistorical stone images .
In these stone images there is description of group dance , view of hunting , drum , celebration of the killing of the lion , etc . occassion .
Hunting used to be assumed as a medium of entertainment , food and communication or connectivity .
During the Vedic period sages developed the tradition of communication .
Development of language and script had been done during Indus civilization , but during the Vedic period prosperous tradition of language was developed and creation of literature was started .
Parallel to the highest criteria of literature , folk art genres were also developed in the society for the entertainment .
Through these arts literate and illiterate people expressed their creative ability .
Genres of Dancing , singing , music , drawing , sculpting , house building , etc . were the result of this folk genre .
The culture of that era is the great example of group culture .
Later , due to the development of education-literature , people got the superiority and internecine class differentiation emerged .
Classification of four caste groups occurred due to this sublimation .
But higher caste group never protest the folk culture because folk genre and folk arts were important for the local information , connectivity and communication .
Since folk artists used to entertain civil or higher level caste groups hence mutual harmony used to remain .
Even emperor or kings used to respect folk artist and used to organize the demonstration of folk arts time to time on the occasion of celebrations , fairs , pilgrimage , etc .
On the occasion of Yagnas Dance , performance used to go on for years , by involving in these people used to make strong their mutual relations .
Edict used to be announced mainly on the occasion of celebration , yagna , swaymvar , etc .
While addressing people , informations for public benefit used to be broadcasted .
Chanakya in his book ` Arthshastra , has indicated about such communication system .
Description of communication resources is found in the epics of Ramayana and Mahabharata .
On the occasion of Rajsuya Yajna , Yudhishthir had sent his four brothers to get the victory in the country ` s distant areas .
The tradition of travelings was very important for communication .
A mutual contact and communication work used to be done by sage , saint , ascetic , monk , mendicant , etc .
Such pilgrimages , religious conferences , preachings , seminars , debates , religious functions , etc . have vital contribution in country ` s cultural integration .
King Ashoka had established a definite arrangement to transmit information in different areas of his kingdom .
Even arrangements of inns , restrooms , etc . started in the reign of King Ashoka .
Information used to exchange on the places like monastery , chaitya , pagoda , holy places , etc .
For public relation King Ashoka had sent Lanka to his son Mahendra and daughter Sanghmitra .
For public relation this was the innovative experiment .
In Afghanistan and other Western Countries Ashoka had appointed prelates so that public communication at the religious level be remained .
In the tribal region , even today after daily work at the time of night people gather at one place and organize folk songs-folk dance , exorcism or worship-sacrifice .
In Bastar , the tradition of ` Ghotul ` is a kind of such a tradition of public relation .
Such arrangements are in the eastern regions even .
In plain regions , these folk arts have refined .
Due to the impact of the Muslim culture number of changes have occurred .
In the genre of song , music , drama , etc. , due to the Persian theater refinement has occurred .
During Mughal period this refinement reached to its extreme .
Traditions of Afghan , Iraan , Mongol , Turka , etc . have enriched our traditional folk culture .
Many Muslim creative people like Amir Khusro , Jayesi , Raheem , etc . brought innovative change in humor , prosody and metaphors .
In the tradition of classical music , Tansena and Baijubawara have done many experiments .
In the drawing and handicraft industry many changes occurred .
Due to Exchange of trade and broad connection with abroad , traditional folk arts have developed .
Though the impact of Britishers over folk art and culture was negligible but due to coming in touch to Europe , a world of communication evolved .
In India formal establishment of Radio broadcasting had happened nearly 1926-27 .
Few private companies had started broadcasting work .
In year 1922 , first attempt related to this had been done .
At first in 1923 Radio Club Bengal broadcasted from Calcutta and in 1924 the Bombay Radio club started broadcasting in Bombay .
In Madras a club like this had been established in 1924 .
But from the government side , arrangement of organised broadcasting could be done in 1927 .
On 23rd July 1927 , Bombay Radio Station was inaugurated by the viceroy of that time Lord Irwin .
After few weeks Radio Station was inaugurated in Calcutta .
Like this golden era of broadcasting started in India .
After year 1934 , broadcasting facilities was developed .
Mr. Lyon Feeldan was appointed as a first controller of broadcasting .
On First January 1936 , in Delhi , Radio Station was established and radio was named ` All India Radio ` .
This name was given by Lord Lilithago .
This year symbolic sound of radio - which you listen daily from the beginning of the broadcast - was launched .
For this symbolical sound , Tanpura , viola , cello and violin instruments were used .
John Fauldas created this sound .
The duration of this sound is for eight seconds and it is played between the interval of ten seconds .
From this sound itself you could recognize Radio .
Broadcasting of Foreign Service of India started on 1 October 1939 from the Pasto broadcast .
One important event occurred in March 1940 when Harmonium was announced restricted to music and in the program of radio its use was barred .
Now a days this restriction has been abolished .
After Feeldan , Bukhari brothers leaded the broadcasting service .
In 1941 Information and Broadcasting division was established .
Indian Broadcast Service , before 1947 , brought up many important changes and did important broadcasting .
On the question of division of the country , on 3rd June 1947 speeches of Lord Mauntbettan , Jawaharlal Nehru and Liyakat Ali Jinnah were broadcasted .
On 14th and 15th August news of independence accomplishment was broadcasted .
With the proclamation of Nehrujee an independent country evolved .
At that time nine radio stations were there .
Among those six were in India - Delhi , Calcutta , Bombay , Madras , Lackhnau and Tiruchirapallee .
Three were in Pakistan - Lahore , Peshawar and Dhaka .
Mahatma Gandhi could broadcast him by radio just once on November 1947 .
After three months of this broadcasting , this constellation left for .
Due to the integration of states many regional radio stations merged with Akashwani .
New Radio stations were opened and in 1950 numbers of these centers were reached to 25 .
During that period from Akashwani eleven languages used to be broadcasted .
In first five year planning about four and half crore rupees were invested .
In the second five years planning Bhopal , Ilahbaad and Ranchi centers were established .
In 1962 even Akashvani Goa was merged into Akashwani .
On 8th June 1961 , after completion of 25 years , Akashwani organized Silver Jubilee .
In third five years planning many supporting centers were established .
At the end of third planning , in the country 35 main stations were there , 17 auxiliary stations , 26 Vividh Bharti centers , 49 receiving centers , 82 media web transmitters and 28 short webs were there .
In 1956 , rural program was launched .
In 1969 Akashwani center -LRB- Code of Conduct -RRB- was established hence purity of broadcasting could be maintained .
During sixth planning commission , in the country establishment of Akashwani centers were started .
In India , the regional Akashwani center is a new concept in the field of broadcasting .
Such every center provides its service to a limited zone and establishes a relationship directly with that community .
A Local Akashwani center works like microphone for the people of its region and try to reform the biography and arts and culture of that particular region .
During the period of sixth planning commission , it was introduced to make Akashwani network quite powerful that it could encourage the developmental program , could spread it .
With the ambition to make foreign service more impactful , sum of money was provided to establish the new high power shortwave transmitter .
It was also emphasized to develop the software facilities , from that , local demands could be fulfilled effectively .
In sixth planning commission , sum of money was provided to build the Akashwani museum to preserve the recorded program of national interest .
For sound broadcasting , in the sixth planning commission provision of the total amount of 122.38 crore rupees was prescribed from which 25 crore rupees for the plannings of increased amount and 97.38 crore rupees for new plannings were allocated .
In seventh planning , in the whole country radio network had reached to its extreme in the perspective of population and area .
Under the seventh planning , from the beginning of national broadcasting , tri-level broadcasting system proposed by Akashwani was founded .
Through the proposed network of local Akashwani centers in the eight planning , not just local community will get a chance to voice their thoughts but from this even national broadcasting system will reach to the maximum number of people which does not reach right now .
It will be possible to reach out maximum number of people by recording programs broadcasted by national broadcasting service and broadcasting those again .
Under the eighth planning , proposal is also to open a channel dedicated to the army .
From this , the discreet broadcast system for armed force which lack is being felt since long time will be fulfilled .
In the nation , national broadcasting service started from a megawatt transmitter established in Nagpur , from that a huge part of the country gets benefits .
Number of broadcasts by Akashwani has increased day by day and by looking at the demand a distinct division has been established for every service .
The national broadcasting service began on 18th May 1988 with the inauguration of a megawatt transmitter established in Nagapur .
The broadcasting duration of this service was increased since 7th July 1989 .
Among the main genres of Akashwani , dramas and allegories have distinct place .
In pan Indian programs , broadcasting of radio dramas started in 1956 .
Even from the other centers of Akashwani dramas in all regional languages are broadcasted .
Like this pan Indian allegories are also broadcasted in all regional languages from different centers .
In 1956 , on the day of 15th August pan Indian program was started .
Due to being an agricultural country , broadcasting related to agriculture had started in 1936 itself .
But these broadcasting were for the region near to Delhi and Punjab .
Later , programs were broadcasted for rural public from the all Akashwani centers .
In 1959 , broadcasting of the program ` Radio Rural Form ` was launched from all Akashwani centers .
Testing of this program was done in 1949 by Akashwani Puna .
The ratio of the broadcasting of the music among the programs of Akashwani is about 4:5 .
Listeners of Akashwani give most importance to music and especially Chitrapat songs are most popular .
This organization which preserved the classical music has done the tremendous work in the field of Sugam Sangeeta and folk music .
From the most of the channels of Akashwani songs are broadcasted regularly according to the interest of listeners .
This program is broadcasted later .
Apart from this to make classical music popular , music-class is also broadcasted .
At the Akashwani centers voice-examination for music artists is organized and artists are selected .
Among the achievements related to classical music , bands of Akashwani placed at Delhi and Madras have the important place .
At this time from the 32 centers of the country , service of Vividh Bharti is being broadcasted .
At first in 1957 since 3rd October Vividha-Bharti was broadcast but advertisement could be broadcasted since 1967 .
At this time advertisements are being broadcasted from 31 centers .
From these advertisement , income of about 50 Crore rupees is gained every year .
This is completely an entertainment dominant service and based on Chitrapat music .
At this time , in the country foreign-service is broadcasted in 25 Indian-foreigner languages .
This service broadcasts the program for more than 70 hours daily .
In that , programs based on news , culture , science and contemporary events are included .
The news service is very ancient service .
At first by Akashwani on 23rd July 1927 news broadcast has started from Mumbai .
At Akashwani in 1937 news service was constituted and initially 27 bulletins were launched .
Before 1957 the name of Akashwani was ` All India ` but All India radio accepted the name of Akashwani Maisoor for Hindi .
At this time 286 news bulletins are broadcasted by the news service of Akashwani , those are in 19 languages of the country .
Daily , about 28 hours of broadcasting are done by this service .
Apart from this 132 news bulletins are broadcasted by regional centers which broadcast in 62 languages and 131 dialects .
Programs are broadcasted by Akashwani for other classes with general listeners .
Among those many programs are included like Yuvwani , programs for women , programs for children , education broadcasting , science broadcasting , etc .
By taking care of local interests and looking at listener ` s demands on 13th October 1984 Akashwani Nagarakoil was launched as a local center .
This service has been started to make effective the participation of local public in rural , economical and social development .
In this service there is provision to ascertain the access of general people to local problems , available resources and technological knowledge .
In the different part of the country , at this time 56 centers have been established .
These centers mainly broadcast by F . M. transmitter which have the capacity to broadcast in the radius of 40-50 kilometer .
These broadcastings are done under the limited resources and programs of public-participation are given importance .
Outside of Akashwani studio in the farms and villages these programs are created .
This is the most effective medium to approach the general public .
Akashwani is a kind of medium which is based on sound .
Importance of sound should not be underestimated because medium of information , education or news is based on sound .
Without speaking or without giving a speech we can not make our thought accessible to another person .
Reference of Akashwani comes even in ancient books .
Although television due to its visual medium is more popular than radio but due to be a cheap and fastest medium it is still more effective in rural areas .
The other quality of radio is this that even an illiterate person by listening could understand the program broadcasted on radio whereas just literate person could understand newspapers .
But just the approach of the radio can not be considered as last motive .
How many people listen radio regularly and how many hear it attentively , this matter is important .
Often radio is played in the houses and family members keep busy in their works .
They must have listen the program , but what did they listen they don ` t know .
Memory power also plays an important role in this direction .
As we dream and forget just after waking up like that we hear the radio program and forget after some time .
We don ` t try to get benefit from the program , hence we forget that .
Many times listeners give this answer that we had listen the program but did not remember now .
To listen like this does not have any benefit .
Radio is just a medium of language-dialect .
It could describe any object or circumstance just by the word .
Hence while writing selection of words should be done carefully so that word could also get the form of view .
You can not hear the program broadcasted by radio again .
Provision of repetition is not there , hence the language and presentation should be like this that the whole thing could be understood at once .
At first we should know this that we are making program for which kinds of audiences , where do they live , what is their cultural background , when do they listen programs , then only we could make fruitful programs for them .
For the programs , research should be done .
While writing for radio it should be taken care that it should be colloquial language .
Language is the main medium .
If language is not comprehensible than interest will not emerge in the program .
Instead of passive form it should be written in active form so that message could be conveyed in a simple way .
Instead of sanskritized words regional colloquial words should be used .
Correct use of orthography should be done and disused sentences should not be used .
Such words should be used in drama which could express the acceptable expression .
Words and sentences , to promote emotion and imagination , should be used in drama writing .
According to the status of every character there should be change in words so that the identity of different characters should remain by sentences .
After writing , for their presentation two things should be taken care - voice or reading and sound effect according to the situation .
Through the sound effect , it is possible to express more in less words .
To present the scene radio does not have a stage whereas virtual surrounding is created by these sound symbols or tones .
While sitting in studio different tone or sounds can be made by the music or instruments .
The sounds of wild animal-birds , thunder , sounds of cannon in war , mob , chaos , etc . are gotten by virtual recording itself .
Putting colloquial words or language dramatically should also be taken care specifically .
By reading article simply does not have an impact .
Hence talk should be dramatised .
More importance should be given to dramatization in dialogue , interview , drama , etc .
If even simplest script is presented in the form of drama then its utility increases .
It should be taken care that the article has to dramitacise mostly , even while doing so why not it has to excassarrate .
If the interest of a listener awakes once then he will listen whole program .
For the excellent program these three advices - live colloquial language , dramatization and proper sound effect - should be used properly .
Instead of plot artistic touch in program should be given more importance .
Radio is the art medium , hence instead of plot its presentation is important .
We try to make plot heavy , the number of listeners decrease due to weakness in artistic side .
Information , education and entertainment - among these three motivations , entertainment is important and by the medium of entertainment it is more easy to give information and education .
Suitable coordination between conversation and music should be even in programs .
Through dramatization maximum information could be conveyed to audiences .
We can not form a new genre daily .
Whatever genre is available those are quite effective in themselves but we should use this .
Instead of an artist radio artist is a craftman because he has to make many programs in a day .
If he spends long time to make just a program artistic then broadcasting work will not run properly .
This is the medium of a huge population .
Due to vastness more artistic programs can not be made on a large scale .
For radio writing colloquial language is a useful weapon .
If language is satirical than half of the work is done .
Instead of classical language colloquial popular vocabulary should be grabbed .
Literature is not a medium , hence it should be kept away from heavyweight literature .
Our programs are for the intelligentsia and they don ` t listen radio .
What do we want to say is not important but what people could listen , this is more important .
If we create programs by taking care of listener than there is no reason that the number of our listeners keep on falling .
Due to the result of sustainable development in the field of science and technology revolutionary changes occurred in the field of communication .
Whatever revolution or changes appears to us in the society , that is the result of the technological development .
Due to inset service a vital change has occurred in the communication medium .
With the help of computer there is the possibility of better development in this service .
In our country development of television is not very old .
After 1980 , idea of colorful television came out that used to seem just as a dream .
But due to Asiyad sports more attention was paid to this .
Due to availability of satellite service it got support to establish the LPT rely center and initially 20 LPT were established .
17th September 1984 , in Delhi Late Mrs . Indira Gandhi had inaugurated the other channels of Durdarshan .
Broadcasting of other channels has started in Bombay and other metro cities .
Durdarshan has achieved the success to make general public educated and aware .
Due to impact of Durdarshan popularity of other mediums has fallen because , due to be a visual and audible medium this is closer to reality .
Due to facility of color television , the attraction of the public towards programs of Durdashan increased more .
In the year 1977 Durdarshan relay centers were established in Jaipur , Hyderabad , Gulbargaa , Raypur , Sambhalpur and Muzapharpur .
In 1933 about 4 Crore television sets were in the country .
After the establishment of inset in space , in the country service has been provided for the whole network .
Although in rural areas television set is not available in the more numbers , but then the farmers of Panjab , Haryana , U . P . etc. states keep deep interests in ` Krishi Darshan ` program .
The popularity of new techniques for farming has increased a bit .
In village areas by taking care of regional demands four HPT of 10 Kw power has been established in Nagpur , Rachi , Rajkot and Gorakhpur , from there programs are broadcasted by taking care of local demands .
Durdarshan has worked on a broad level in the field related to education .
In 1967 , Unesco by considering the use of satellite necessary for education has suggested to do an experiment in India .
Programs of Durdarshan are generally more catchy than other mediums and has become most successful in attracting people .
But such programs are related to entertainment itself .
Programs related to education-culture could not get much popularity due to popularity of advertisement and sponsored programs .
Popularity of Durdarshan is more because of movie show , Chitrahaar , sponsored programs and programs related to sports .
Among sponsored programs ` Rajni ` , ` Hum Log ` , ` Buniyaad ` , ` Ye Jo Hai Jindgi ` , ` Nukkad ` , ` Kacchi Dhup ` , ` Kathaa Sagar ` , Itihas ke Panne ` , ` Vikram Betaal ` , ` Dada Dadi ki Kahaniyan ` , etc. , have got the good success .
Successful telecast of popular epics like Ramayana and Mahabharata on Durdarshan has increased massively the number audience .
During their telecast it was observed that the audience of every cast and religion , forgetting their all busyness certainly used to watch these programs .
Also due to beautiful presentation of advertisements , the attraction has increased .
But in all these programs there is a lack of social concerns .
Except one-two programs correct portrayal of social problems is not found in any program .
Degree of entertainment is quite high in these programs that any message could not be taken seriously .
Program sessions for children and ladies is not enough .
Literature related telecast session is almost negligible .
Sports related programs have become successful in maintaining their impact .
Due to National-telecast and network-telecast these programs are available in the whole country .
Since 3 December 1991 telecast of question sessions of the House of Commons and the senate is also an achievement of Durdarshan .
Session of morning and afternoon assembly has expanded also .
Due to release of satellite 2-B in space On 23rd July 1993 , extra relay channels have been gotten by Durdarshan .
Instead of giving autonomy to the mediums government wants to improve the quality by making them competitor .
Like this it could compete even with foreign rely organizations like Star TV , MTV , Prime Sports , etc . and could stop the movement of advertisement to foreign channels .
Although the problem may come after movement of few channels ` program in the private sector .
Companies with utmost business perspective may demolish the level of programs or may misuse the programs for their self interests .
Hence , also code of conduct or quality evolution kind of system should be there .
Now Durdarshan will work as a management hence its responsibility will not diminish .
Audience reaction on programs will also give the direction to these private companies .
Hopefully healthy competition will make these programs more effective .
Among the mass-communication mediums importance of films is utmost because films are the most popular medium .
For entertainment , poor-rich all people give priority to films .
In the country , the film industry has taken the form of a huge industry .
In the whole country , almost 13 Crore movie theaters are there and every year more than 800 movies are created .
Beside that even Indian film division makes documentary films .
Most of the films are made in Hindi , Telugu , Tamil , Kannad languages .
Bangla , Marathi , Gujarati languages have position after this .
Few films are made also in Asamiees , Bohjpuri , Panjabi .
Cinema has been called magic of the modern era because the utmost effect of cinema occurs over teenagers and youths .
Cinema has terror over the all areas of interest , fashion , behavior , lifestyle , etc .
Popularity of film artists are how much even any political leader does not have that much .
Due to this vital influence itself , in our country ` s culture few changes have occurred .
To bring change in a traditional and conserve society is not easy but cinema has made it possible .
In 1931 , in India first voiced movie ` Alam Aara ` was created and after that many development occurred at the technical level .
For the film creation permanent studio was built .
Shantaram himself made many films .
The Bombay Talkies and The Imperial companies also have created many films .
Work of film making started at the broad level from Bombay , Calcutta and Madras .
Mahboob Khan , Sohraab Modi , Jaminee Studio , Satyajeet Roy made many successful movies during 1940-50 .
Satyajeet Roy during his long experience got the fame in the international film world .
Sohraab Modi in 1953 made first color film ` Jhansi ki Rani ` and later color films are being made in great number .
Now a days , all colorful films are created .
Rajkapur , etc . Created the great films and gave an important place to social-familiar issues .
Hindi films have not left untouched any subject .
For great news such elements are assumed essential in which most of the readers have an interest .
In a way it could be said that the presence of such catchy and interesting elements itself makes news .
Even number of such elements will be great and also change occurs in this according to time .
It is revealed that in the Muradabaad district at the place named Matalpur tank pipe was cut off because of that train stopped there .
The train driver stepped down with his assistant to fix the tank pipe .
Tanks pipe was fixed the moment goods train started .
The driver and his assistant kept staring at it helplessly .
Taking speed of almost 70 Km per hour train disappeared from their eyes .
Nine years old Amitesh Purohit from Indore has created a new world record in Lombo Skating by passing out under the 13 centimeters rode .
Amitesh created this record here on the on going consummation occasion of 12th national sub-junior school sports competition .
