Food security gets promoted .
It makes the farmers debt free by doing rural development .
Energy resolves the problem .
Nature and environment remains clean .
They save the animals and birds from getting harmed by making the water and land toxin free .
Using more than required chemical fertilizers reduces the fertility and productivity of land .
The manufacturing group of seeds and fertilizers are in collaboration with the government and preventing the way of organic farming .
Finance Minister Sri P . Chidambaram has assured in Lok Sabha that the government banks would provide more and more loans to organic farmers .
He explained that banks do not keep a distinction between organic and synthetic fertilizers .
Organic foods get all types of estate .
Organic fertilizers and bio-fertilizers fall under fertilizer control policy and standard quality control .
A committee has made a provision for 2500 crore rupees in 11th five-year plan in order to encourage the organic fertilizers .
Welfare works have been started by various service providers .
There are arrangements to set up agricultural-clinic and agricultural-trade centers for agriculture graduates .
There are provisions of 25 % grant , two years of grant interest , 50 % marginal amount for a loan of 10 million for every graduate of agriculture .
An agriculture graduate can set up an organic - cultivation center .
K.V.K. trains the farmers for traditional farming which is a Zodiac system of agriculture -LRB- based on the movement of planets & constellation -RRB- .
The farmer has to take accreditation in order to get the label of organic farming .
Label contains the name of product , weight , price , property etc .
In Punjab the farmers get certificates from organic counseling and the farmers get 15 % more profit by selling their organic products to the counseling .
According to the research of Tamil Nadu Agriculture University , quality in production and enhancement in quantity is found in organic farming .
The regions where agriculture is depended on rain , there is consistent increase in production .
Organic farming is a part of civil society industry . It does not exists in public sector .
Organic farming is the basis of human rights .
Mahua Organics is helping the farmers .
They are selling organic rice , potato , spice after buying them from the farmers .
Ambuja Cement Foundation -LRB- A.C.F. -RRB- is contributing in organic farming by following its C . S . R . polic .
For doing organic farming in 9 acres ,9 farmers , spent an A . C . F . worth one fourth of 7000-8000 rupees .
The rest was spent by the farmers .
More organic food was produced and there was premium selling in market .
50 farmers with 50 acres of land came forward to do organic farming in the success story of A . C . F . .
Organic farming promotes indigenous seeds .
Organic farming does not depend on seed marketing company .
Deccan Development Society -LRB- D.D.S. -RRB- , Hyderabad got the permission from P . G . S . Organic Council of India for labeling its product as organic goods .
100 farmer groups have been made in Tamil Nadu , Karnataka , Maharashtra , Andhra Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh under their auspices .
Women are doing significant work in organic farming .
Prince of Wales import organic-foods , coffee , tea , spices , pulses , milk , eggs and herbs from India and them exports them to middle east , Japan , America and England .
Garbage to Gold - G2G : - In Mumbai slum dwellers keep wet garbage in a pit and vermi-compost gets prepared after garbage collection .
In Andhra Pradesh S.H.G are selling organic red chili powder in international market with premium with the help of export agency .
Conferences , seminars , workshops , etc . are organized for the awareness of farmers .
Here special discussions are held to resolve various problems of farmers .
Organic farming is based on knowledge and technology .
Information and agencies play important role in that .
The World bank has made a policy for food security for all countries .
Now India is heading towards food insecurity .
Only organic farmer can increase food production by carrying organic farming .
Organic farmer is a sensible person .
He provides an opportunity for others to get healthy food , decent environment and happiness through his power of thinking .
Seeing the intense competition the current policy is to provide organic food to ordinary people at modest prices .
Industry gives benefit to the organic farmers by working in this direction and provides an opportunity to move forward .
No country can be said to be a sovereign state until it imports food for its people .
Therefore only organic farmer is the food security guard of the country .
Shastriji ` s slogan `` Jai Jawan , Jai Kisan `` applies to organic farmers .
After the completion of 60 years of 20th century , fast growing population and up to some extent capitalism pressurized to develop a system of quick production .
During 1960 decade , the production rapidly increased because of the use of hybrid seeds , chemical fertilizers , pesticides and means of irrigation in the green revolution adopted for food .
After the green revolution other productions almost became double and it became able to fulfill the requirements of growing population .
But because of the use of chemical fertilizers soil fertility started decreasing .
Hybrid Varieties were sensitive for several insects .
Initially these insects were in control because of the use of traditional methods .
In order to reduce the effect of these insects , pesticides were used in more quantity .
Because of which our atmosphere started getting polluted and pests developed the resistance towards Pesticide .
The quality of water was also effected severely as the chemical elements got dissolved with water combined into water sources .
Modern agriculture started depending more on external inputs such as chemical fertilizers , pesticide , herbicide and machinery .
The major ill effects of modern farming include soil erosion , lack of water availability , soil salinity , chemical fertilizers and pollution due to pesticides .
Quality of food has reduced because of the use of pesticides and polluted water .
The solution of these all problems lies in organic farming only .
Crop producers no more have the same taste which producers of conventional farming had .
Man has been stabilizing agriculture by following the traditional knowledge of agriculture , correcting previous errors and also on the basis of his experience .
The negative and harmful aspects of chemical farming were first identified by the farmers of European countries like - Germany , France etc .
In 1923 Dr . Rudolf Steiner , an Austrian scientist was the first person to tell that chemical farming along with agriculture destroys the thinking power of human .
Drugs prepared by micro-organisms are used in pesticide management .
The enemy pests are efficiently managed .
Hybrid disease-free crops and animal species are used .
Green manure and nitrogenous plants are used .
In India poor small and medium farmers carry the Rain-fed farming , which does not require much chemical inputs .
Only these farmers are suitable for organic farming .
Day by day the demand of organic products is increasing in some super markets .
The farmers have a golden chance to fulfill this fast increasing demand .
Majority of the farmers in India belong to middle class .
Initial investment at high rates for modern farming is beyond reach for him .
While all the inputs organic farming have been provided by the nature , the farmers can get more benefit at less investment .
The main goal of 11th five year plan -LRB- 2007-12 -RRB- is to elevate the standard of living of our farmers and strengthen the economy .
Organic agriculture is a tool through which this objective can be accomplished .
Today when both the farmers and farming are in danger , organic farming is the only alternative .
Some people have a doubt that they will not get the same production with organic farming what they get by using chemical fertilizers .
Regarding this it can be said that till the first 3-4 year only average production could be availed but after that both productivity and production will increase .
Therefore without wasting time organic farming should be popularized .
The cost incurred is low and the soil quality also remains intact .
Insects do not get destroyed because of the increased amounts of bacteria and production capacity increases .
Today we are talking about second green revolution , which will be based on soil .
Soil is the life saver of the farmers .
Like industries , today ` knowledge management ` is utterly required in agriculture .
Meanwhile our country needs to move towards ` soil revolution ` from ` green revolution ` , then only the future of mankind will be secured .
Today while it is necessary to fulfill the increasing consumer demand for organic food , the big worry for agricultural development is to maintain consistent sustainable production .
Organic farming is quite different from traditional chemical farming .
Actually organic farming can be said to be a sub section of sustainable agriculture .
The only difference is that it requires a certification of a recognized institution according to legal standards .
Currently more than 95 % organic agricultural products are consumed by developed countries .
The main producers and importers of organic agriculture are European Union , USA and Japan .
In a country like India where still farmers use traditional farming methods and where the farmers of small agricultural land holdings are in large number , organic agriculture is most appropriate .
several kinds of organic nutrients are naturally available in various geographical areas of India which can prove to be a boon for organic farming in the country .
Including areas with 100 to 10,000 mm rainfall in the country there are mountainous and deserts also .
In fact in the hilly and rain fed areas of the northeast in country the use of chemical fertilizers is almost negligible .
All these areas naturally fall under organic farming .
According to an estimation India has approximately 76 , 000 hectares of agricultural land under organic farming and 2.4 million hectares are forest , which are the sources of wild herbs .
But in reality the agricultural land under organic farming is much more than this .
Among Indian states Uttaranchal and Sikkim have declared themselves as organic farming states .
According to an estimation during 2006-07 India exported organic products worth 301.24 billion .
Excluding the herbs exported from UP and MP the export of organic products from India is estimated to be around 85 % .
India occupies a special place in the export of organic tea , it also has great potential for other products .
Similarly spices , fruits etc . are some other products which have good export potential .
The Indian companies certifying organic foods will have status equivalent to European Commission -LRB- EC -RRB- .
With this the Indian organic products would not require to be certified by European agencies and the export value for organic agricultural products will be less .
According to an estimation during certification only 500-1000 euro per hectare would be saved .
Indian government has formed 6 institutions for the certification and authentication -LRB- domestic or international -RRB- of organic agricultural products .
National organic standards have been fixed for organic production under national program .
Currently 11 accredited certification agencies are functioning in India .
INDOCERT located in Kerala is also one of the domestic certifying agencies .
Europe is the second biggest market of organic food products in the world , and half of whole production of world is consumed here only .
The European market of organic agriculture is estimated to be around 9 billion US Dollars and its annual growth is approximately 20 % depending upon the market situations .
Japan is the biggest organic food market in Asia .
In 2003 , the retail sales of organic food and beverages was 2.5-3 .0 billion U . S . dollar .
Out Of this , import was worth around 360 billion U . S . dollars .
Saudi Arabia , U . A . E . and South Africa are other markets for organic foods .
Currently India ` s share in global organic coffee market is 1 % out of 150 million U . S . dollars and its share in the global organic spice market is 3 % out of 3.2 million dollars .
In the context of increasing production in India it is assumed that it will keep increasing .
The organic fruits and vegetables exports from India to U . S . and European Union is approximately 40 % .
If the post-harvest initial infrastructure and cold storage chain are effectively strengthen , then there would be huge potential for India in this sector .
Dairy is another sector where sufficient potential exists for India because majority of he fodder fed to the animals is free of chemicals in India .
India has certainly become successful in exporting agricultural genes to major organic food markets of the world .
India ` s population is more than one billion and out of this 400 million people belong to middle-class .
Neighborhood grocery shops are dominating the retail market of foods for such a large population .
There are 11 small shops available for every thousand person .
In this system price of food increases during the channelization of food products from field processor - distributor - retailer - customer and quantity and quality also decreases .
Supply chain is very weak in India .
There are more than 50 % edible products among the production of retail market in India .
the percentage of brand less products are greater in number .
Therefore in India , there is tremendous opportunity for such kind of branded marketing .
Recently big corporates of India have come forward in this sector and are trying to increase the retail business by opening their retail chains .
97 % of India ` s retail business is occupied by hawkers , push cart vendors and grocery stores .
Hawkers and pushcart vendors are said to be moving supermarkets and these belong to self organized sector .
They are seen on every street .
These retail marketers of low cost neither have their native village nor city .
They sell their products only by going streets to street .
Grocery stores consists of small , medium-sized shops , retail shops of edible products and family shops .
These shops are available in the vicinity to fulfill everyday needs of people .
In U . S . such shops are known as mum and pop stores .
Grocery shopkeeper - It is such a powerful system which is not seen anywhere else in the Asian region .
Vendors are main components of unorganized sector .
They have their own system which is quite appropriate for India .
This wing of retail system is good for the poor public of India .
Any kind of permanent location is not good for them .
So it is difficult to assess their financial input into the trade .
They set their business with little investment and taking little loan Where there is place for a person to sir at the footpath and they will also more or less visit their homes .
This system is long lasting and is spread in whole India .
This is a primary source of employment for poor .
Weekly marts are held in rural areas of India .
Nearby local dealers and farmers transact all kinds of items in these markets only .
Retail trade of grocery goods for the first time began in South India .
The first family retail chain was Nilgiri ` s .
Later corporates such as Big Bazaar , Reliance Fresh etc . established their chains in Hyderabad , Chennai and Bangalore .
Along with big , medium and small cities and even in a population ranging from 1 million - 5 million corporates have Organized retail chains .
Costs can be reduced by using technological knowledge .
With the use of inventory management and I . T . instruments in supply chain , consumption pattern or customer habits can be determined .
With the help of two innovative technical systems such as cross docking and electronic data inter chains direct connection of head quarters is established with selling terminal .
Sellers are analyzed here .
Besides the detailed analysis of customers could be done with the help of data warehousing .
NGO services are being used at local level in corporate farm management so that essential rights products are availed at proper time .
There are several brokers between the supplier and retailer in the traditional system .
But in the modern retail system they are directly related to the producers .
Transportation plays an important role in the supply of food products .
Corporates get logistics from external sources .
Cold chains spread all across the country has cold storage facilities , cold chain , refrigerated vans and other special services are provided by logistics companies .
This is a huge facility for modern retail business .
With this unique delivery system has been developed .
Indian consumers have enough information about the quality and price of products and they only want to buy the best things .
Customer ` s favorite things are easily found in organized chains .
Grading and standardization methods are performed at various stages of preparation of food products , processing and storage .
The employment in retail business establishments in rural areas is 39.28 % and in cities it is 45 % .
After the invasion of big corporates in retail trade , the small shopkeepers will suffer loss .
Their financial sources will disappear .
They would not be able to compete with large corporates .
Benefits of corporates will increase the and the income of farmers will reduce .
Indian retail food market is worth Rs 1 , 500 billion .
Out of this the share of organized retail shoppers is only 2 . 5 % .
The price of goods should be decreased in order to increase this share .
After the establishment of this system these stores will be a threat for the branded food industries .
Along with retail shops supermarket is also a popular system .
It is difficult to be a part of the production process of small and marginal farmers for a long time .
The autonomy of farmers ends due to contract farming and wholesale purchase .
On the suggestion of regional specialization by big corporates , the farmers might suffer loss because of the impractical crop production by growing single crop in a year .
Farmers only will suffer a loss because of monopoly in purchasing power and monopoly control over farmers and their products .
Currently around 40 million unemployed people are dependent on this sector .
Their livelihood will be lost .
According to a recent survey , there has been decline in 4.2 % of annual turnover of the unorganized retail sector but according to them its cause is not the organized sector but the competitiveness of the unorganized sector .
The survey stated that by the entry of organized retail sector the profitability of the farmers will increase by 60 % .
Because of organized retail sector farmers will get benefits by directly selling their produce to the purchasers .
They will be able to use the new technology , seeds etc . and increase their productivity .
According to this report one can take the help of contract farming for bulk purchase which is now being used by big corporates like Nestle .
According to a report because of the entry of large corporates into retail market , farmers , customers and small informal retail traders will be benefitted .
Economy particularly agricultural sector is more likely to increase with this .
Despite the projected merits of the organized retail chain , small traders across the country raised voice against these large retail chains .
Movements were carried in many cities .
It was estimated that because of the large retail chains 20 million people lost their jobs and livelihood .
Small shopkeepers decided not to sell airtel sim card in Mumbai against the Bharti - Walmart joint venture .
Many freedom fighters , supported these movements of small vendors .
These small traders say that the big corporates want to have their monopoly over the market by being producer , wholesaler and retailer .
Famous NGO leaders say that the whole world is going towards corporate-to-cooperative .
In such a situation the retail chains of large corporates will be detrimental for the people of India .
Thus strong protest appeared in all areas against these corporate chains .
According to them , globalization is not only applicable to multi-ethnic companies but also to poor public .
Unorganized retail trade was strengthened in south Asian countries and it increased significantly .
Traditional shops and vendors were restricted to areas with less population and their physical structure was increased .
Preventing the entry of large corporates is like preventing the sunrise .
Unorganized retail sector might be helped through Cash and Carry system .
According to a survey it was also revealed that because of the coalition of farmers and corporate , intermediaries have disappeared and there has been 40 % increase in the profit of farmers .
The only thing to be kept in mind is that along with large corporate the existence of the small shops should also be ensured .
India occupies ninth position in large retail trade marketing .
History gives us the information about our interchange and business relationships with many countries .
This country was seen as a rich country .
This prosperity only attracted traders from several countries to come here and start their business .
After the invasion of the Yavanas during medieval period this country got destroyed .
Later , instead of promoting the business opportunities here , the British also followed the strategy of looting .
After freedom this country has touched new heights by doing hard work .
The market paying reasonable values of products is main requirement of farmer .
Enhancement in agricultural business and purchasing power of a farmer is possible only when he gets right price of his product .
The retail traders in India purchase the products from wholesalers .
Many layers of traders work in this trade and pricing of the commodity is done by combining the profits of all these traders .
As a result there is huge increase in price till it reaches the consumer .
Because of this marketing system while at one side the producer gets less value on the other side consumer has to pay more amount .
By reducing the gap between producer and consumer both will get reasonable profits .
so far the marketing system at our place was mostly carried by unorganized traditional sector .
According to Indian retail report India ` s retail market is worth 270 billion dollar which is growing at a rate of 5.7 % every year .
485 billion or 4.7 % share of the retail market is controlled by big corporations .
The rest 95.3 % retail trade is carried by traditional retail traders .
But the retail trade carried by corporations increases at the rate of 28 to 30 % every year .
It is estimated that around 6600 mega stores would be established with an investment of 40,000 billion rupees by 2011 .
It is estimated that for every thousand population there are 11 retail shops which do not include shops of weekly markets .
In the Indian retail market following corporations are giving large scale impacts and they are expected to remain influential further .
Many major changes would be seen in the near future in this sector through merging and acquisitions .
Subhiksha : - This society was initiated in 1997 in Chennai , whose founder is Mr R . Subramanian , and who has educated from IIT and IIAS .
This institution deals with grocery goods , fresh and frozen food , consumer goods and books .
It is prevalent in the form of subsidized store .
` Saving is my right ` is their motto .
Reliance retail : It is a branch of the Reliance Industries co-ordinated by Mukesh Ambani and it is active in market since June 2006 .
Spencers : It is also known as RPG Enterprises , which is a very large professional association and its annual turnover is worth Rs . 7500 billion .
This industry is coordinated by Mr . R.P. Goenka .
By 2009 there are plans to open 2000 stores .
Star India Bazaar : Trunt Ltd - This is a Tata group industry which deals with private label products of high-margin for customers of B and C class .
They also have an outlet named by Tata Kisan Sansar .
Big Bazaar , Pantaloon -LRB- Future Group -RRB- : - This industry is run by Kishore Biyani . Its policy is `` Capture All `` , which means selling all kinds of items for people of all ages through various stores .
Many multinational companies - such as Wal-Mart , Carrefour , Tesco , Metro are looking forward to come to India .
Under the current directives of the government FDI is allowed only in wholesale cash-and-carry model but it is not allowed in multi-brand retail stores .
In single brand retail shop FDI is limited to 51 % but multibrand international retailers may trade with franchisee route where their Indian partner will run their business operations .
Future joint venture between Bharti and Wal-Mart is famous which is being extensively raged .
While at one place air pollution spreads because of large-scale use of vehicles by institutional retailers at the other place the environment gets contaminated by increased use of plastics and packing materials .
Pollution on original sources increases with more power consumption , also the ozone level in environment gets dis-balanced because of air-conditioning systems .
Mediators have a major role in the current system and thus they get employment at large scale .
It is a myth that farmers will get good prices .
The entrance of effective chains like FDI and Wal mart in retail market will be very harmful and it will end the traditional retail system .
A big share of profit coming from this sector will go to foreign countries .
Organized retail business is beneficial for consumers , producers as well as mediators .
In southern and eastern parts of the country , there was no bad impact on the traditional retail trade because of organized retail trade but it increased their employment .
Traditional merchants sell their goods to customers on credit , because of which large number of clients are still with them .
44 % of the customers in eastern part and 32 % of the customers in southern part of the country are still with traditional merchants .
Lack of banking facilities to the traditional traders are blocking their progress .
Low-income consumers have gained most by purchasing from organized retailers as most traders providing discounts belong to organized institutional sector .
89 % of the mediators have decided to continue the traditional retail business .
Only 3 % of the mediators have chosen to change the business .
There has been 60 % increase in the profit of farmers who have directly sold their products to institutional shops .
Cash and carry model like that of china should be adopted for getting fresh food products from farmers .
A uniform law should be made in the entire country to provide licenses and permits and there should be comfortable arrangements to avail these facilities .
` Competition commission of India ` should be empowered to curb the opportunity of organized sector to increase price .
Institutional traders in Brazil get permission to trade with city councils by dealing and guidelines are fixed at national level .
For modernization of retail markets a board has been established in Singapore which manages organization and modernization of small stores .
In Taiwan markets have been declared as fully modern and they have been converted into super markets .
In Hong-Kong the management of markets is handed over to private managers .
Most of the countries are now members of WTO and as per the treaty with organization the concept of open economy has become real .
Therefore this is the best idea to overcome the risks of danger and achieve success by using the available opportunities evolved from this process .
Globalization is a reality . It has opportunities as well as risks .
If we study the various issues of the agricultural problems then gist of all these studies gets stuck to an important thing , which is - distribution of agricultural products .
If today agriculture needs any supportive factor then that is - adequate employment based on organized markets and economic advancement of rural areas of the country .
Agricultural distribution system has been defined in many ways .
Still if it is to be defined precisely then it can be said that this is a tangible institutional arrangement which include various activities ranging from the source of agricultural production , availability of the produced good in the hands of consumer , transportation and several other services .
In the activities of modern marketing of agricultural products , agricultural products reach their last consumer by passing through the hands of several mediators .
Current scenario - In India organized marketing of agricultural products has been promoted through regulated marketing network .
Most of the state governments and union territories have passed 2 laws for the regulation of markets belonging to agricultural products .
During 1950s decade only 286 regulated markets were available in country , but by march 2006 the number reached to 7566 .
Besides this there are 21780 rural marts in India , but only 15 % of them work under the periphery of organized and regular markets .
The transportation of products and goods is carried through a large chain of mediators and agencies .
Production , rural traders or mediators , contractors before harvesting , commission agents and transport agents are the main working component in the primary market .
Thus processing and production agents also include as an additional mediators in secondary market .
In the process of marketing all the mediators get some share of margin with their contribution .
Therefore , price of products increases unnecessarily .
The nature of agricultural products and their state of being deteriorated makes their seasonal availability more complex .
Suppliers have the weaknesses of infrastructural management .
Many problems have evolved due to fast growth in agricultural products such as additional marketing of food grains etc .
At the same time there is need to face challenges due to liberalization in the global market and to take advantage of opportunities also .
Transition phase - In the new agriculture policy of India it has been said that partnership of private sector will be promoted by contract farming and participation of private sector will be encouraged through leasing of land whereby technology transfer , private flows and secure market of crop production could be increased .
A partnership between the Indian corporate and rural India is flourishing with extensive coordination .
` E-Chaupal ` has started an ambitious ` E-Chaupal project ` which aims at enabling Indian agriculture at international level and vast improvement in living standard of rural India .
The main target of this scheme is to ensure regular supply of raw goods by establishing control on this supply chain .
In remote villages of Madhya Pradesh , Karnataka , Uttar Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh , e - Choupal has been established by farmers with the help of computers having internet and printers through portal .
These kiosks are run by leading farmers of villages which are called ` Sanchalak ` .
Operators are trained to run computers .
The current market values of all state markets are displayed at these kiosks simultaneously .
It also contains weather information and provides knowledge of various scientific systems to farmers .
E-Chopal has provided the chance to buy soybean , rice and other crops to I.T.C directly from farmers .
Undoubtedly with this type of system the farmers have got an online market in their own remote villages as a substitute of market .
Transaction costs are reduced with this system .
Currently e-chopal has reached 3 lac 50 thousand farmers through 650 kiosks with which farmers interchange soybean , coffee , wheat , rice and pulses .
There are possibilities of contract farming in an agricultural country like India .
Seeing their welfare , companies are also analyzing their facilities provided by states .
A world famous company has started contract farming in Haryana for the production of barley .
SAB Miller India is a world known company which has provided their famous brands FOSTERS , CARTLE , HAYWARDS to the market and it has associated 400 farmers through contract farming in 2500 acres .
Bangalore based Global Green Company has achieved good success though contract farming and now it is the biggest gherkin producing company of India .
The fertile land of the country is favorable for several kinds of grains , fruits and vegetables in every season .
The current fruit production of our country is 32 million metric ton which is 8 % of total fruit production of the world .
With 15 % of the total world vegetable production , India is the second largest vegetable producer .
In order to make a modern and effective marketing system , farmers are required to make large investments in cold storage houses near their farms after harvesting .
A huge part of this investment can only come from the private sector .
Therefore appropriate strategic decision must be taken .
Further the process of directly buying agricultural products from the farmers should be encouraged .
So that an effective interaction between agricultural production and retail chain is established .
Recently government has taken some steps to promote modern terminal markets for fruits , vegetables and other agricultural products in important city centers of India .
Such types of markets will also provide affordable as well as modern infrastructural facility to the farmers .
The working system of these terminal markets is based on `` HUB AND SPOKE `` model where terminal markets in the form of hub are connected with spoke-like collection centers .
Along with removing all quantitative restrictions on imports , the merging of Indian economy with global economy seems to be more practical .
We need to take ample advantages of the competitive scenarios in international trade .
The government has followed `` Region and special product policy `` to promote the export of various agricultural products .
This hypothesis is known as Agri Export Zones .
Two tasks are done in commodity future markets , stipulated price and price risk management .
By the value stipulation work , participants are helped in understanding market conditions and taking business decisions accordingly .
The major economic work of future market is to promote the market access so that transaction costs are reduced .
According to an estimation every year a loss of Rs 80 , 000 billion is suffered .
The annual consumption of fruits and vegetables in U . K is even less than the fruits that are wasted every year in India .
Therefore it is extremely important to do post harvesting management such as focusing on cold storage and good transport management so that post harvesting loss may be removed .
Production is incomplete until it reaches the hands of last consumer in required condition , on time and at desired place .
Therefore market occupies an extremely important place in the process of production .
Generally 5-6 mediators are found in Agri value chains .
Farmers only get 25-30 % share of the value paid by consumers .
This is a big challenge before Indian agriculture .
It needs to be resolved .
Indian farmers have an average land even less than two hectares which is also the root cause of farmer ` s problems .
The information technology phase has brought revolution in information transaction at world level .
Farmers can not take advantage of current market prices and small farmers always fail in taking decision in their favor .
Some action has become possible in this direction by starting e-chopal by some corporates like ITC and some positive results are also observed .
There are unlimited opportunities for information technology in the Indian agriculture sector .
By the execution of international standards it has become mandatory to maintain the quality of crops for export .
The primary function of any market is to do the pricing of goods and services on the base of their demand and supply .
The current price of the commodity in spot market depends on its actual demand and supply .
Today ` s price depends on today ` s demand and supply and future price will depend on future demand and supply .
The segment determining the future price of the commodity in market is known as future market .
In any economy value performs an important function of efficient allocation of resources .
Unlike a normal market , the work of Commodity market is not only limited to pricing but also to provide risk management solutions to people .
The Future market paves way to manage risks related to commodity price through future and option derivative products etc . .
Commodity markets has an important place in economic growth and development of countries .
Uncertain weather , persistent global imbalances and fast increase in demand is responsible for rapid fluctuation in prices of commodities and this raises the risk management requirements .
The outbreak of institutions like future market is because of these factors only .
In 2002 multi-commodity exchange was established at national level .
At international level major commodity exchanges exists in America , Japan and England .
Transaction level of international commodity market is five to twenty times more than the spot market .
Commodity futures are bought and sold in the commodity market .
Thus , commodity futures is the product of derivatives series where underlying commodity is a commodity rather than a security .
Price fluctuation of the commodity futures depends on underlying commodity price fluctuation .
While on the analysis of definition , commodity futures looks like forward covenant , the symptoms of its distinction with forward covenant also appear .
Evidently , in the case of commodity futures not only commodity , price or volumes are preset , but the quality and location of their delivery etc . are also preset .
One of the two parties is definitely a commodity exchange .
Thus the exchange acts as a central counter-party .
Settlement Guarantee Fund is also sustained by the Commodity Exchange , which is similar to the fund , sustained by stock exchanges .
Every similar covenant represents a certain quantity of fixed quality commodity whose transaction is done at a predetermined location .
This covenant is transferable and with the passage of time , due to changes in demand and supply of commodity , the price of this covenant also varies , with the changes in spot prices .
This covenant can be freely bought and sold in the secondary market with variable value .
The spot price of the object during any time also determines the value of the covenant .
This type of contract called futures , always happens through commodity exchange rather than being directly between any two individuals .
Only commodity exchange is responsible for payment or delivery of the commodity .
Actually commodity futures is used for speculation or risk management , and the actual deliveries are non-existent .
Due to commodity market the producers of commodities can sell their production at fixed price before its production .
On the other hand , consumers can buy the commodities at preset prices before the actual date of consumption .
Thus not only the producer escapes from the risks of possible increase in prices but consumers also escape from the risks of possible increase in prices .
Commodity market presents a very scientific and just process of risk management which fulfills the need of both producers and consumers .
By putting the related commodity in go-downs approved by exchange for longer period , transaction to sell at better prices in the futures market can be carried .
Fluctuation in commodity futures market are not so intense as they are in the stock market .
Hence , commodity market transaction is relatively safe .
By balancing the demand and supply of various commodities , this market determines an undisputed and acceptable price very transparently .
If a deal is settled without delivery opposite to deal then sales tax does not apply .
Sales tax applies only in those cases where delivery is taken or given .
Usually it is the responsibility of the seller to collect and pay the sales tax .
From June 1 , 2008 , the Government has provided the system of commodity transaction tax .
The covenants in NCDEX expires on the 20th of every month .
If there is a holiday on 20th then the expiration date will be a day before that date .
In the case of the item with greater fluctuation values , margin amount is increased .
In addition to risk management , the derivative products are largely used by speculators .
The truth is that the speculator class is the backbone of any future-market .
No futures market can not be imagined without speculators .
Speculator class is the class which manages not only the risks inherent in the actual commercial transactions but assesses the risks and its direction already present in the market , attempts to get benefits out of it .
The class of real commercial risk management is ignorant of demand and supply and other subtle factors affecting prices , and does not have the skills to analyze concerning data .
He is engaged in commercial transactions and his interest lies only in the prevention of risks related to those transactions .
In contrast , speculator class has a deep understanding of market and the various factors that influencing it .
By closely studying the ever-changing conditions of demand and supply of the commodity at regional , national and international level , spectacular class gets skilled in the accurate assessment based on its solid inferences .
The profit or loss made by him depends on the accuracy of market values estimates .
So he does this work with professional dedication .
He deals in futures markets on the basis of these estimations .
Since speculator class is a knowledgeable group and 90 % of the market is driven by this class only , therefore , market values and their future direction indicated by the transactions done by this class can be considered as solid signal .
Speculator class only provides the desired liquidity to market and freedom to deal on different prices to actual business risk managers .
This class provides balance to the market rather than imbalance .
Thus we see that spectacular class actually saves the market from rapid and unexpected imbalances and provides it balance and presumability .
In the opinion of experts the reason behind ever increasing inflation is increase in the price of imported crude oil and perpetual reduction in global food supply .
The common people suffering from continuously rising prices , estimate that the high levels of betting in commodity market is responsible for it .
Abhijit Sen committee appointed by Parliament has made it clear in its report that futures business and spot market prices have no correlation .
Increasing prices are concerned with rapidly rising demand than supply , which is an international issue ant not limited only to India .
In addition to the various segments of society , banking group also gets benefit from Commodity market .
The banks providing loans can save themselves up to great extent from possible NPA by dealing equivalent to the value of the loan in futures markets .
It is specifically possible in those situations when borrower fails in paying debts due to loss because of the fall in prices .
After passing of proposed amendment in Banking Regulation Act , banks will get the permission to trade in futures market .
In that condition banks would not only be able to do proper diversification of their investment portfolio on behalf of clients but also by proprietary deals .
Through such transactions fee income can also be obtained by the banks .
As a result of the liquidity thus witnessed in commodity market the banks may transfer their risks by closing the warehouse receipts in futures market .
Globally , the commodity market size is ten times more than the size of the share market .
The general perception of people may differ but experts believe that generally future trade is not responsible for the fluctuation of prices in spot market .
The steps hurriedly taken to prevent the activities of commodity market appear like killing the messenger who brings bad messages .
The vegetable production in India is 108.2 million tonnes -LRB- 2005-06 -RRB- which is second highest in the world .
Being the country with different kinds of suitable climate plenty of natural resources , 85 types of fruits and 175 types of vegetables are produced in India .
Despite all these factors , the total export of our country is just 1.0 % of the total agricultural and food product export of the world .
There is only 2-3 % processing in fruits and vegetables .
The share of India in mangoes production of the world is 59 % share but it has only 13.55 % share in export and only 2.35 % fruits are processed .
Our export has become negligible due to less production , more domestic consumption , low quality and lack of exportable products in large quantities .
The domestic industry has to prepare high quality products at reasonable prices in order to make it suitable for export market .
By cultivating and exporting off season fruits we can earn more profit .
The Processing sector of our country is also the largest in terms of production , consumption , export and growth prospects .
Export of processed foods has crossed Rs 15 , 000 billion .
However , seeing the potential in processing and volume of fruits production , still lot of work has to be be done .
Fresh flowers of India are exported to 87 countries of the world , mainly , Australia , UK , Japan , Netherlands and United Arab Emirates .
There has been major growth in cut flowers .
For the export of flowers more than 150 pro-export units are being developed in the entire country , especially near the Pune , Chandigarh , Bangalore and Delhi .
Agricultural export zone was presumed to enhance the exportable agricultural products , and to give reasonable price of the commodities to the farmer community .
So far , 60 such agricultural export zones have been established .
Investment of 17 billion rupees was proposed for these agricultural export zones and so far 8 billion rupees are spent on them .
Several agricultural exports zones are exporting more than required target .
34 applications are under consideration for establishing agricultural export zones .
Under the various schemes of state and central government various economic and other assistance are being provided in these agricultural export zones .
Under its various schemes and provisions , APDA would play complementary roles in state governments ` efforts to increase the export of agricultural and food products .
According to the estimation of international consultant Dunn and Bradstreet , agricultural and dairy products worth around 13 billion U . S . dollars -LRB- Rs 52 , 000 crore -RRB- are wasted in India .
There are several products in the food sector which yield good price after morning harvesting and by the evening they remain fit only to be fed by cattle .
The farmers can escape loss by selling such products from food parks on time .
In the absence of processing and immediate selling there may be up to 25 to 35 % loss in fruits and vegetables .
The big Indian and multinational companies have a processing capacity of 30 tons per hour .
There has been remarkable growth in this industry due to liberalization and removal of excise on fruit and vegetable products .
For the overall development of the agricultural sector there was a proposal to develop 36 food parks like the software parks .
Each of them has a grant of Rs 50 billion .
There is a possibility to provide jobs to 75 million people through these food parks .
Food parks are being developed to provide support to the agricultural sector .
This will encourage the food processing industry and the dream of reaching reasonable quality foods from farm to plate will be possible .
Food ministry has kept a provision of Rs 1 , 500 billion for food parks through special purpose vehicle .
NAFED , Spices Board and the State Trading Corporation has initiated the making of agricultural food park by building a special purpose vehicle and the first food park is being made in Madhya Pradesh .
State Trading Corporation has already established two food park in Karnataka , one for chili and another for pepper .
National Horticulture Board and APDA , are providing attractive economic incentives for establishing chilling and packaging industries .
Govt . of India is giving 25 % subsidy on investment -LRB- Maximum Rs 50 million -RRB- for establishing processing industries in the food parks .
These pre-manufacturing period of production for these food parks will be of 3 to 5 years .
Cold Chain and food processing technology will play an important role in the development of mega food parks .
Farmers can also do the harvesting , grading and processing of their crops according to the daily need of food parks , thus food parks will get fixed quality of raw materials at proper time .
This will benefit both the farmers as well as the food parks .
Farmers will get a fair amount for their crop .
They will also get more benefit by growing cash crops .
Food parks should be established away from towns and cities in the remote areas so that rural population gets benefits from them and cities do not get overcrowded .
Brokers will not play any roles in all these works so that farmers get a fair price for their produce .
The produce of the farmers can also be collected in their farms as per the requirement .
These food parks can be installed for one or two specific products or for multiple products .
This is a very good move for the overall development of agriculture .
Contract farming will also develop through food parks .
Through contract farming , farmers will receive seeds , fertilizers , technology , etc . from the company .
Their products will be sold at a pre-determined price .
Price will also be reasonable .
The immediate selling of products will eliminate the possibility of loss .
Hence , the producer of the raw material will get better value for their goods at proper time .
Agri Export zones and food Parks up tp some extent can also do the work of complementing each other .
The product remaining from export can be utilized in local food park .
Seeing the various possibilities today almost every major corporate of India is investing in high-tech agriculture projects .
With 2.5 % geographic expansion on this globe of earth our country India is more rich in medicinal -LRB- therapeutic -RRB- plants and holds 25 % of the world ` s biodiversity .
The mountains of our country are its treasure , every tree , plant , flower or seed definitely has some medicinal use or another .
The main cause of this biodiversity is our country ` s diverse geographic position .
Annual rainfall is measured between 2 inches to 400 inches .
The country India which contributed an excellent discipline like Ayurveda to the world is now more popular for unity in diversity .
The saying ` Mera Bharat Mahan ` seems to be true when we see the growing importance of Yoga , Pranayama , Ayurveda and medicinal plants in Western countries .
But the herbal medicines described in our 3500 year old Ayurveda science are still effective .
There has never been any difference in the formula of Triphala powder and Rasayans .
Their inventor saints had no desire to get the patent .
Due to the adverse impact of chemical pharmaceuticals , the demand for medicinal herbs has increased in the west as well as our country .
People ` s inclination towards Ayurveda and unconventional medicinal practices has even increased in developed countries .
This factor only increases the likelihood of progression of Indian medicines and aromatic plants .
During ancient times , human life was extremely simple , regular and full of hard work .
He was constantly in touch with nature .
Today the situation is quite opposite .
Human is getting miles away from nature .
Irregularity in diet has become a way of life .
Due to atmospheric pollution and leading stressful life diseases are triggered .
Therefore the demand for harmless drugs is increasing before the doctors .
Man has been using medicinal herbs since ancient times .
It is very essential to save the rich botanical heritage of our country , because nearly 200 medicinal plants are on the verge of extinction .
Less developed countries such Malaysia , Thailand , and Philippines are engaged in the export of forests .
India also has lost many acres of forest in this lust .
According to National forest policy there should be forests on one third of the land .
Preparation for new agricultural revolution in the world is being initiated .
The path of prosperity in the village will now go from cities to villages .
If farmers want to be connected with the global market then they have to produce these things .
Today Ayurveda has a market of Rs 300 , 000 billion in the world .
This market is expected to soon expand to Rs 10 million crore .
India has negligible share -LRB- 2.5 % -RRB- in this market .
For agricultural revolution after Ayurveda , agriculture will now then with processing .
China is ahead of India in the global herb market .
Indian forest dwellers gather herbs and sell them in the local market , and its price depends on the local merchants .
India has nearly 10,000 licensed pharmacies .
Local doctors and herbal physicians also demand for these plants .
The reason behind negligible participation of India in export of medicinal plant is demand for best quality by foreign traders .
The farmers here are not able to fulfill this demand .
The reason why the Indian farmers adopt traditional farming over medicinal plant cultivation is a matter to be considered at national level .
The price of medicinal plants are mainly concerned with quality .
They keep fluctuating .
The farmers does not want to adopt such strange cultivation unless he gets adequate assurance .
The price of plants and herbs collected in forests are less than the plants grown through cultivation .
Like fruits and vegetables herbs are not easily sold in local market .
The farmers have to depend on the mercy of local herb traders .
Several medicinal plants are industry based .
Amla , Ashok , Bilwa , Neem etc . trees take longer time to reach production level .
That is why farmers neglect them .
Identifying correct plant with textual description in classical texts is a difficult task , which an illiterate farmer can not do .
This is the reason drugs are adulterated .
Negligence of government machinery is an important issue .
That is why the cultivation of medicinal plants do not get sufficient encouragement .
Several medicinal plants are not properly classified .
The cultivation of fragrant flowers require more land because those plants contain 0.5 % -1.5 % oil .
Government machinery has to function to encourage the cultivation of medicinal and fragrant flowers .
For this it is essential to make agriculture policy .
It is extremely important for the national medicinal plant council to encourage the farmers for the cultivation of these plants .
It is essential to train the farmers about the cultivation of herbs , conservation , market system , parameters of quality etc .
There is no need to cultivate several medicinal plants which grow in forests and infertile land .
It is very easy to collect them from barren land .
They grow in immoderate quantity in forests .
There is no possibility of their extinction .
It is very essential for the forest dwellers collecting those medicinal plants from the forests fix minimum price for the plants and provide them .
The agricultural University should do the significant job of correctly identifying many such plants that have been described in Indian classical texts .
There is a debate among the scholars regarding the correct identification of the significant plant Som .
Ban on the use of chemical insecticides while cultivating medicinal and fragrant plants is essential so that they are exported overseas and they fetch more money .
It is very essential for the various universities to organize training camps for progressive farmers .
The dream of our former President Shri Abdul Kalam to list India among the five super powers of the world by 2020 does not seem to be possible with the second green revolution .
Perfumed oils can be obtained from any part of the plant or from the entire plant .
Oil can be obtained from the entire body of konifery plants .
Perfumed oils can be obtained from the root , stem , leaves , flowers , seeds , fruits or any part of the flower .
Perfumed oils can be obtained from the root or rhizome of turmeric and ginger plant .
Efforts are being made to obtain oil from the roots of curcuma aromatica and curcuma zedoaria .
The powder made from the roots of these plants are used in medicines and cosmetics .
some oils are obtained from the seeds and dry flowers .
Oil is also extracted from the leaves of coriander .
Oil is obtained from the leaves , flowers and immature fruits of the trees of lemon species .
The chemical composition of perfumed oils are completely different from vegetable oils and fatty oils but both the kinds of oils are obtained from plants only .
Compounds of turpentine , alcohol , aldehyde , ketone , ester , phenol , alkaline , nitrogen and sulfur are found in perfumed oils while fatty oils contain glycerites of high fatty acids .
There are various uses of perfumed oils some of the major ones are : soaps , cosmetics , perfumes , medicines , biscuit industry , aromatic tobacco , juice etc .
With new researches it has been found that lemongrass is used in the preparation of vitamin ` A ` .
they are also used to make perfumes , scents etc .
The art of making scent or perfumes is quite ancient .
Perfumed oils or perfume related thought and the technique to obtain them was first developed in eastern countries such as China , Egypt , France and India where they were prepared from various parts of the plant such as wood , plant and flowers .
Ancient Chinese traveler Fahwan has written in his memory cards that India is a country of perfumed plants , fruits , raisins and grass .
By studying the art of preserving dead bodies in Egypt one gets to know that Egyptians knew the art of obtaining preserving and perfumed oils .
Farsians were the first to obtain perfumed oil from rose flowers .
Imn Rawalin -LRB- 810-617 BC -RRB- who was the emperor of Faristan used to submit 30,000 bottles of rose water every year in the treasure of Bagdad in the form of tax .
In India perfumed elements are used during religious purposes in sutras and vedas .
Buddhists used to bathe the statue of their god with perfumed water .
During Vedic period sandal , camphor , saffron and musk was used .
During Gupta period -LRB- 300-400 BC -RRB- perfumed cosmetics , perfumed hair oil , kajal , cream etc . were used .
Information regarding Indian perfumed elements exists in Pali and Islamic books .
Mughal rulers had helped in the development of perfumed elements in India .
Abul Fazal in the book ` Ainey Akbari ` writes that Akbar the great was extremely fond of perfumes .
His palace always remained fragrant with perfumed flowers and incense sticks .
In Uttar Pradesh perfumed elements were produced in Kannauj , Jaunpur and Gajipur .
The perfume of which ancient people knew was sandal .
Sandalwood and sandal oil were only used in the beginning .
Kannauj , Jaunpur , Gazipur , Lucknow and Pune lead the world in the production of perfumed elements .
Commendable efforts have been done by the Indian government and people for the development of perfumed oils in independent India .
Now the perfumed oil research committee has been merged with Central Indian medicinal plant organization .
these institutions are functioning under ` scientific and industrial research council , New Delhi .
Works are being carried in research institutions for getting good knowledge about the chemical elements present in perfumed oils .
This work was carried first by scientific research centers of various states and many significant plants were successfully cultivated .
Sesame , Pachauli , menthol and arbenis are popular among them .
Other people interested in this sector have also worked at personal level to merge the cultivation of these plants and distillation process .
some time back Central medicinal plant organization have successfully cultivated cytronal grass , eucalyptus , sitiodora , geranium , pachauli lavender plants from semi-professional perspective in Haldwani , Bangalore , Lucknow and Utakamand centers .
Indian standard institution has occupied a good position in the export of perfumed oils from India .
Foreigners have appreciated the qualities of perfumed oils and they are totally satisfied .
While exporting oil to foreign countries their qualities should be properly examined , then only they should be send .
This work has been handed over to the laboratories of ` marketing and examination directorate and inspector ` , India .
Perfumed oils vaporize very quickly which can be easily separated with the help of spread vapor .
There are several methods of distillation .
They are used keeping the nature of product in mind .
Following measures should be essentially taken while doing distillation .
The temperature should be kept low as far as possible .
Lowering of temperature is extremely important because at high temperature the various existent chemical factors in the perfumed oils separate that is at high temperature the elements of perfumed oils lose their stability .
The distillation method of raw materials should be carried in favorable conditions .
The raw material out of which perfumed oil is to be extracted should not be in powder form .
Majority of the factors of perfumed oils , except few are soluble in warm water .
Hence very less amount of perfumed oil is obtained when distillation is carried by adding more water in little amount of raw material .
This method of water distillation is extremely important .
Perfumed oils contain certain quantity of ester .
Longer duration of distillation and by taking more amount of water while distilling , the the ester present in the perfumed oil break into hydro-lime copper acid and alcohol which yields very less amount oil .
Water distillation separates more amount of ester over vapor distillation hence vapor distillation is more significant as compared to water distillation .
Water distillation should be avoided as far as possible or they should be carried for little time .
Vapor distillation is not a good method to obtain perfumed oils from flowers .
Water distillation method or vapor distillation method should be only used to obtain oil from flowers .
Both these methods are good but flower and vapor distillation method is the best in this regard because this method gives good quality of oil and in more amount .
But vapor distillation method should be only used to obtain perfumed oil from flowers at industrial level because this method yields good quality and more amount of oil .
The temperature can also be easily controlled in vapor distillation method .
The raw material should be in such condition that it completely gets dissolved with the raw material while doing water or vapor distillation and it should remove all the elements of the raw material from the perfumed oil .
There is no need to crush or cut little parts of the flowers , leaves , grass and to obtain perfumed oil from them .
But the tough parts of the plants such as wood , seeds , fruits , root or peel should be cut in small pieces or crushed in order to obtain perfumed oil from them so that more and more walls of tissues break and the oil easily comes out with vapor .
After properly cutting or crushing the raw material they should be washed with clean water so that perfumed oil does not evaporate by being vapor .
Before using the roots of orris , leaves of patchouli and roots of vanilla the pieces should be properly mature .
The dry parts of some plants or dry plants preserved during the time of harvesting are beneficial in the form of raw material .
Geranium and osimum filimund - karikum plants are used in dry form to obtain oil from them because more amount of oil is extracted in dry form .
Raw materials should be saved so that vaporization , oxygenation and other chemical processes do not occur because all these processes destroy the amount of perfumed oil in the raw material .
Therefore it is extremely important to save the raw material the the environment effect to get good quality and good amount of perfumed oil .
Water distillation method is the most easy and less expensive technique to obtain perfumed oil and using this method perfumed oil can be extracted from the entire world .
The raw materials are boiled with more amount of water in this method .
When the raw materials are put in boiling water they float at the top or drowns but space is left for vaporization .
This method yields good quality and good amount of oil when worked carefully but when the raw material comes into contact of hot part then the actual fragrance of the perfumed oil gets lost with the heat of raw material .
Water heads are not made during the contact of raw material with vapor while extracting oil using this method .
Another obstacle while using this method is that perfumed oil whose boiling point is more or which are soluble in water can not be easily extracted using this method .
This process of distillation yields more amount of oil and the time involved is less as compared to other methods and hydrolysis is also more .
Thus the rate of distillation process should be organized so that more and more high quality perfumed oil is obtained .
The distillation process done at low rate can be harmful because the oil can not be extracted properly from the raw materials and the amount of oil obtained is negligible .
The hydrocysis process is also very less in the distillation process carried at low rate .
Water and vapor distillation method is particularly popular among the industrialists and industries producing oil is less amount .
The distillation equipment is very small here which is directly heated using fire .
Big distillation pots are heated through vapor jackets or closed helix .
The surface pots are kept on another layer during this distillation process so that they remain away from the boiling water .
This pot is dried with the help of saturated low pressure vapor .
The element to be used as raw material should neither be powdered nor cut into small pieces .
Hence raw materials that is roots , stems or peels etc . should be medium shaped .
The distillation process of oils with high boiling point takes longer duration .
Vapor distillation : - During this process of distillation high pressure vapor more than the pressure of environment enters into the distillation pot .
During this distillation the temperature of pot is much more than the temperature of vapor .
High heated vapor has the capacity to cool that pot and thus less oil is obtained .
Separation takes place because of high pressure vapor .
In India vapor distillation is generally used to obtain turpentine , sandalwood and vetivar oil .
Squeezing method : - This method is used to obtain perfumed oils from the plants of lemon family .
Perfumed oils from oranges , lemon and virgovote are obtained using this method .
Three kinds of methods are used for this .
Sponge Process : - This is an extremely ancient method .
The fruits are cut into pieces using an axe in this method and the substance elements are brought out using a spoon .
Now the peels are soaked or put into water . Later oil comes out .
The peels are kept between sponges to extract oil from them .
The juice thus extracted is collected and finally filtered .
The obtained oil contains high value .
Kule method : - In this method a metal has a hollow pipe which contains spines .
The fruits have to cross these spines only because of which the cells break and the fluid gets collected at the surface .
This method yields even less amount of oil than the sponge method .
Several machines have developed in America and Italy on this principle .
Extraction through solvents : - Despite being a good method it is not satisfying in majority of the matters but prove to be harmful because of the presence of high temperature vapor in perfumed oils the temporary perfumed chemicals are lost .
Sometimes the amount of oil obtained is also very less .
Hence in order to get away from these shortcomings another method is used .
This method is known as solvent extraction which is satisfying as compared to distillation method in majority of the cases .
The solvents used in this method are vaporizing or non vaporizing .
Enflurez at normal temperature : - This method is mainly used in jasmine , tuberose and quite often for oranganicule , Kudeyute etc .
`` Chassis `` is set one after another above the glass plate with a wooden frame .
Flowers lie between these two glass plates .
The entire fragrance of those flowers are gradually absorbed .
After absorbing all the fragrance the flowers are thrown out .
Jasmine flowers are put on glass plates everyday and the next day they are thrown out .
Tuberose flowers are kept for two-three days .
This chassis is continuously moved up and down .
The flowers are changed till the time they completely absorb the oil .
Extraction through vaporizing solvents : This method is mainly used these days because it is extremely useful .
During this method carbon solvents such as benzene , methanol , acetone , petroleum and ether etc are used .
Before using these solvents they are treated with sulfuric acid and obtained in pure form .
Several carbon solvents are used for this method but petroleum , ether and benzene are mostly used .
The extraction process is done using an equipment which is known as extractor .
In majority of the cases the oil obtained using this method get the color of the flower from which they are extracted .
The color of the oil depends on the color of the solvent used .
In order to remove the colored particles of the oil , distillation is carried in the presence of colorless wax or they are exposed to ultra violet rays .
Although India produces high quality perfumed oils but only few oils are exported abroad .
On the other hand India itself imports perfumed oils worth 17-20 billion every year from abroad .
The entire manufacturing process of current perfume industry is entirely different .
The fragrance of any flower is seen by synthesizing it as to what are the chemical elements which provide fragrance to the flowers .
After preparing those chemicals in the laboratory , the synthesized perfume of the flower is prepared and alcohol cytronelol and geraniatn chemicals are used .
Phenol ethyl methyl ether contains the fragrance of kewar flowers .
According to the present import policy of the government India export 4000 perfumed chemicals from abroad .
These chemicals are brought through international perfume industry .
The preparation of majority of the synthesized perfume chemicals are based on pines .
Indian turpentine oil is commonly obtained from `` pinus longifolia `` .
Opposite to other countries the turpentine found in India contains 30 % more pines .
The population of the world is continuously increasing and the level of our way of living is also rising with this .
That is why with the passage of time the need for cosmetic materials and perfumed oils are increasing .
Thus we see that there is great scope for perfume industry in the future and this industry is expected to grow perpetually .
Along with developing this industry , more and more quantity of cheap perfumed chemicals needs to be prepared .
The demand for perfumed oils obtained naturally from plants is increasing because the preparation of extracted perfumes in laboratories requires them .
In order to develop this important subject it is necessary to plant foreign variety of plants and trees in large numbers by the various state governments through their forest departments , they should be cultivated and trees should be planted in the form of forests .
For this barren , sterile land should be used .
In order to encourage them the Uttar Pradesh government has given them land at extremely low value for cultivating perfume .
Even today we are confronted with many difficulties which stop us from moving forward .
We face scarcity of high quality raw materials .
Ever increasing price rise becomes a problem in cultivating these plants and extracting oil from them .
Lack of advanced machinery and other facilities always pose hindrance in these sectors .
Ways to grow more and more plants providing perfumed oils and stop the hindrances that reatrd their production are being considered .
Perfume can be extracted from plants .
Several plants are continuously being used in perfume industry and other agencies .
Consequently their specialization in nature is decreasing .
Therefore it is essential to evaluate them after collection for proper use , then only better varieties could be prepared and production techniques equivalent to them could be developed .
In the year 1959 A special organization named central medicinal plant organization was formed .
Its purpose was to assist in the development work of perfumed and medicinal plants and maintain a co-ordination between them .
Indian perfumed oil association also has a significant contribution in this industry .
A technical magazine named `` Indian perfumer `` has also been started by this association for its overall progress in 1957 .
Because of the unprecedented progress in science and technology , there has been such an increase in the production of these perfumed oil crops that not only the domestic demand is met but several products are also being exported .
Apart from sandal lemongrass -LRB- Agya grass -RRB- , Pamrosa -LRB- Gandhej grass -RRB- , geranium -LRB- Bhanda -RRB- , Pachauli linel etc . other various kinds of oil are prepared in south India .
Majority of the total lemongrass oil produced in the world is cultivated in India and this crop is grown on the slopes in rainy conditions .
Citral , a factor of lemongrass oil contains a lot of vitamin ` A ` content .
As a result of the research carried in Kerala University , an excellent variety named `` O-D `` has been developed .
This variety of plant gives twice the leaves as compared to local variety after 5-6 years of plantation which contain 85-92 % oil content .
As a result of research works carried in other centers , `` S D-68 and R.R.L-16 `` -LRB- Jammu -RRB- varieties have been issued which are sown in different parts of the country .
The perfume obtained from Jasmine grandifloram plants are expensive .
Ko-1 and pichi varieties of jasmine have been developed by Tamil Nadu agricultural University which contains 0.05 % perfumed oil content .
Jasmine orchards have been planted in subtropical regions which continuously yields flowers for 7-8 months round the year and per hectare production is 10 tonnes .
Nitrogen fertilizers are required 6 times for good crop round the year in that region .
The plantation of barsera delpikiana was first started near Bangalore in Mysore .
they are prepared from both stem and seeds and every year they give around 20 k.g oil per hectare .
National botanical research institute , Lucknow : - Recently there was downfall in the quality of roza demasin flowers in national botanical research institute as they became excessive hot .
Another new plant has been developed for carrying distillation in institute farms and new distillation method has been found which gives 0.03 % amount of oil as per the weight of the flowers .
This plant is small that is why it can be easily moved from one place to another .
Regional research laboratory , Jammu : - Including other centers Japanese mint has been successfully grown by the institute in Jammu .
Adaptation capacity and production related studies have been carried on Menthol Arbesis sponsored by UNESCO .
Guidance has been given by regional research laboratory -LRB- Jammu -RRB- and central medicinal and perfumed plant institute -LRB- Lucknow -RRB- for growing menthol in Haldwani and lowlands of Uttar Pradesh .
The crop becomes ready in 3 years .
Apart from providing employment opportunities to several people every year its production gives 7 billion foreign exchange .
An offspring of Indian agricultural research institute department : - `` S-79 `` , `` S-3839 `` and `` S30-4 `` varieties of Thyme have been developed in the department to increase the production of fennel seed crops .
Good amount of leaves were produced by growing Pusa C 350 variety of coriander developed through hybrid method with sugarcane crop .
The seeds of the other variety `` Sheetal `` contain a lot of oil content .
National sapling offspring resources bureau , New Delhi : - It is concerned with sapling offspring means .
This organization fulfills sapling related needs of the scientists in the country and abroad .
It is extremely important for us to be sure that the future generations should get a saplings mediums with healthy base and which is error free and which remains ineffective of foolish use of sapling mediums .
Sowa is a winter crop .
Their all plants are used as vegetable and for aroma .
The seeds are famous for their medicinal values and the reason behind theses values is their vaporizing oil .
They are mixed in several medicinal compounds .
Its vaporizing oil with sowa oil  water emulsion proves to be beneficial particularly for cold among children .
Their seeds are also used as spices .
Sowa oil is also used to give fragrance to soaps .
3-3 .5 % vaporized oil is obtained from sowa seeds .
Its one part is filled with water and that is why it settles at the surface of the receptor during distillation .
It is majorly planted during winters but it can also be grown during summers .
Open space with full sunshine is good for good production .
For this loamy and sandy soil and land with proper drainage is required .
25-30 trucks of cow dung should be added in the farm before sowing and they should be mixed properly by doing 4-5 times of plowing .
Irrigation suitable drainage should be build in the farm .
sowa is sown between August-November .
This crop should be planted at high place during rains so that the crop does not gets rotten .
A lot of moisture is required at the farm during plantation at the farm so that the seeds settle .
Little irrigation should be done if there is lack of moisture in the farm .
Irrigation should be done at an interval of 8-10 days during summers and after 25 days during winters .
After 3-4 weeks of sowing during first harvesting the weeds should be removed .
First trimming is done after 4-5 weeks of sowing and then after trimming is done after every 15 days .
It often catches drying disease which is caused by a fungus named fuzerium .
Shortness , curling or other kinds of deformation is also seen in them due to virus which reduces production .
Apium Gravioles ver . apium the kandol which is known as celery is a plant of `` ambeliferry `` family .
They are also known as celery with turnip roots .
Their roots are consumed after cooking .
It is a family of around 40 species with yearly or multi yearly herbs and is found is temperate regions or hilly tropical regions .
In France Agraviloyans is cultivated to get seeds and in entire Europe and America for salad .
Their seeds are exported to America , Europe and Japan from India .
Dry mature fruits -LRB- celery seeds -RRB- are spices .
It is used as anti numbness and it energizes nerves .
In India celery leaves and stems are mostly used by Europeans to make salad and soup .
This herb contains glucoside and epin .
Light yellow colored vaporizing oil is obtained from celery fruits which gives a specific kind of smell .
They are known as celery oil in the market and is considered to be useful as a stabilizer and creates unique fragrance .
Celery is a biennial plant in cold climate and hills and there this seed grows in the second year and in plains it grows in a single year itself .
It is a humid loving plant of cold climate .
This crop takes a lot of nutrition from the land therefore it should be supplied with rich manure which is carefully prepared .
Clay soil is not good for this .
The drainage of farm water should also be proper .
The farm should at least be plowed using a tiller for two-three times and made powdery .
The plants should be planted in rows .
The plants are prepared by sowing celery seeds .
The crop matures and gets prepared by April .
The seeds are sown in hilly areas during March-April .
Celery requires a lot of water .
Celery catches some fungal diseases such as early blight , late blight and bacterial blight .
spraying of sulfur and dry lime is suggested to control insects .
No big harmful insect destroys it in India .
Artimecia Palens Wall is a traditional vegetative plant of `` compositi `` family .
They are used in temples for worshiping and garlands and bouquets are also made .
Flowers of several species of this plant are sold in southern India at small scale .
Perfumed oil of dawan is exported to America .
This crop requires intense sunlight , winter without fog and heavy dew during morning .
Dawan can not even tolerate heavy rainfall but irrigation is required .
Therefore it should be cultivated very carefully .
Red sandy soil which does doesn ` t holds water is good for its cultivation .
The seeds have so much fragrance that ants make so many holes in them while eating .
Hence its cultivation requires special care .
Their seeds are very small and 6000 seeds weigh around one gram .
Two meter long and one meter wide beds are made for them .
10 kilograms of rotten cow dung manure is mixed in every bed .
No chemical fertilizer is added during this time .
The soil of every bed leveled after mixing the manure .
One gram seed is required for one square meter area .
These seeds are properly mixed in soil of around 4-5 times the amount of seeds .
The sprouted seeds are mixed in dry sand which helps in carrying and holding them .
A thin layer of sand is layered at the top when all the seeds are sown .
Then again it is irrigated .
It starts sprouting by the next day .
The nursery is irrigated everyday with the help of fountain in the first week of sowing .
Within 7-10 days of sowing the plants properly grow in the nursery .
The plants grow well if they are supplied with 10 grams of urea in the third week .
Then after 3 meter long and 1 meter wide beds are made to transfer dawan .
The farm is irrigated one day before the transfer .
Little irrigation is done after plantation .
The farm is again carefully irrigated after the completion of one week of plantation .
Weeds should not be allowed to stand in dawan farms . Weed removing should be done at least 2-3 times in the farm .
Irrigation should be regularly done after every second or third day depending on the climate .
The plants grow with intensity and withing seven weeks the plants start bearing flower buds .
For cultivation the plants with buds are chosen before they start flowering .
After transfer generally all the flowers start flowering within 10 weeks .
The beds are again irrigated .
Because of this the trimmed plants again bear saplings and the crop can be harvested after 1.5 months .
The plants are allowed to dry in shade for 2-3 days before doing the distillation process .
Distillation process takes around 8-10 hours .
Dawan oil is relatively lighter than water .
It carries fragrance similar to fruits .
Currently good business of this oil can be carried .
Artimizia vista is also grown in India .
This oil carries the values of destroying fungus and bacteria .
Basera Despichiana pais is a plant of `` bersiresi `` family . Sinaili oil is extracted from their wood and fruits .
This tree originated in Mexico .
It was brought to India in 1920 and was planted in Tatbuni a village near Bangalore .
Oil was extracted from the peel of the fruits in Tatbuni .
2.5-3 .0 % oil was obtained from wood in Mexico .
While in India 18 % of the oil is obtained from fruit peels .
During trading this oil is known as Mysore sineli oil and Indian lavender locally .
The ripe fruits fallen from the tree are collected and dried in shade .
The fruits are collected for 2.5 to 3 months .
The peels are removed and processed under vapor distillation .
Mysore sineli oil is light colored .
The fragrance of kumudini , lilac lindan , vlosam , vanga , yang yang and sweet p soap can be established in this oil .
It is also used as transparent soaps .
Basera plant grows well on hilly land , sandy and loamy soil .
Sineli trees can be prepared by planting seeds and stems with roots .
Trees with 2-3 years of age are good for stems .
The stems are always taken from mature trees .
The stems are cut in such a way that 5-10 c.m long growth remains on the tree .
Some branches should be left on the tree .
One meter long and 1-3 c.m thick stem is good .
If the stem carries any kind of wound then it should be closed with wet soil .
soil mixed with cow dung is good for this .
Because of this the stem quickly heals wounds and water flow is stopped .
The stem is kept towards top to bottom .
A pit is dug at the middle of the pot and the stem is planted by pressing the stem in soil while planting the stem .
The soil is pressed with hands after planting the stem and the pots are kept in shade preventing them from sunlight and wind .
The stems start sprouting after three weeks of plantation .
The stems get all the roots within next four weeks .
The stems that bear roots are transferred in farms during rainy season .
This transfer is mainly done during the end of August or beginning of September .
Now every fruit is carefully plucked so that the root of the plant does not move or break .
It is kept in a pit .
In the beginning a stick or bamboo is tied with the plant to support it .
Sometimes the plants catches white ants which harm them .
To prevent it the plants should be filled with water immediately after planting them .
The plants are easily planted in the farms and they start bearing new leaves by next May .
The fruits start ripening by the end of July and fully ripe by the beginning of August .
The leaves of the plants shed by November-December .
Irrigation should be done twice a week if there is danger of plants catching white ants .
Rainy water should be collected and filled in pits if the plants are planted in big farms .
Plants are firm and they do not require manure once they are fixed in the land .
The number of flowers increases by supplying them with phosphorus fertilizers .
The amount of crop depends on the age and shape of the tree .
The first crop should be taken only from 10 years old trees .
The branches of the tree are soft and can not bear the weight of a single man .
Hence small children are asked to climb the tree to pluck fruits .
Experienced laborers should be used for this work .
The fruits should be spread and dried at bamboo mats if there is no drying facility .
It is not necessary to remove the seeds and peels from fruits for distillation .
So far India is not attacked by harmful diseases and insects .
Linanul is obtained from its oil .
Whose value in the foreign market is around 500 rupees per kilogram .
Coriander has its origin in Mediterranean ocean region and is grown at large scale in Russia , middle Europe , Asia minor and Morocco .
It is cultivated in all the states in India and it is an important crop in Madhya Pradesh , black soil in southern India and fertile loamy soil of northern India .
It is cultivated in all the districts of Punjab .
The branches , leaves and fruits of coriander give lovely aroma .
The entire plant is used to make chutney when it is small and vegetable curry is garnished with their leaves .
The fruits are powdered and added as spices in different kinds of edible items such as pickles , vegetables , flesh etc .
The fruits are also used to enhance the taste of some sweets , pastries , cakes and items made from tobacco .
In America and Europe coriander is used to give flavor to liquor especially gin .
The market coriander contains a lot of external elements such as stems , dust , fenugreek and paddy .
The aroma and taste found in coriander fruits is because of a kind of surmic oil .
The amount of oil varies according to the source of fruits .
The lack of oil content in Indian coriander is because of the loss of vaporizing oil while drying fruits but this statement has not been proved through experiments .
Still Indian oils have good variety of fragrance as compared to European oils and percentage of ester is also more .
Coriander oil is a colorless , light yellow liquid which has a peculiar fragrance and taste similar to coriander .
Raw fruits and other parts of the plant give little inferior quality of oil .
This oil is mainly used in the form of fragrant in fluids and in cocoa and chocolate industries .
It is used in removing the ill effects of drugs causing fatigue and cramps and in improving the taste of bitter medicines .
Apart from hydrocarbons coriander also contains 19-21 % aliphatic oil which is black , brown , green in color and smells like coriander .
The sodium soap prepared from them are perfumed and produces good lather .
It is soft and green in color .
Coriander is a significant spice which is used in abundance in India .
The details of their production and internal trade are not available .
Majority of the production is consumed within India because of which it is exported in little amount only .
Although crops grown in different regions are of the same species but there is huge difference between the shape , form and quality of fruits .
The commercial qualities are mainly named on the basis of places .
Morocco and Russian species compete with Indian coriander in the export market which are quite valuable .
It is assumed that Indian samples are mostly adulterated with stems , external seeds , particles and dust therefore their value is less though in quality they are no less than Morocco samples .
Coriander crops are sown in mixed which is commonly dependent only on rains .
It is grown as irrigated crop in some regions .
The fruits are smashed before sowing so that fruit seeds separate .
The crop matures after three or 3.5 months of sowing .
Then the plants are plucked along with their roots and the fruits are shed after drying .
Then they are dried in sun , cleaned and then packed in sacks .
In India very less attention is paid at putting manure while cultivating coriander .
From the experience of European countries one gets to know that there is excessive growth in the amount of fruits due to manure .
By the experiments done in Russia it has been found that the amount of oil in fruits have increased with the use of fertilizers .
Coriander catches fungal and rotting diseases , fungus attacks when flowering begins especially when the climate is warm and moist . It can be effectively treated by spraying 0.6  sulfur or bodo mixture .
No control method has been found so far to prevent them from rotting .
No dangerous organism attacks this crop .
Lemongrass oil is one of the significant perfumed oils grown in the world .
The major reason for producing this oil is citril concentration .
India has the monopoly as a major exporter and developer of high quality of lemongrass in the market at some point of time .
Because of the competition with middle and south American countries the export of lemongrass from India has reduced in the recent years .
Although the demand for synthesizing vitamin ` A ` was increasing for domestic use which is considered to be a good opportunity for the propagation of lemongrass cultivation in the country .
cimbopogon citratus is one of the species of lemongrass that are cultivated in India .
It is also known as Malabar or Cochin Vas .
There are two species of east Indian lemongrass .
Cimbopogon flexuosus is one of those species . Its local name is `` Cumanna Pulu `` . It is also known as red grass .
Their stems are red in color , the leaves from which the oil is produced contain 75 % or more aldehydes .
The aldehydes obtained from this oil are mainly citril .
This oil is a good solvent .
Majority of the fraction of Indian lemongrass is obtained from this red grass .
The other species of east Indian lemongrass is known as cimbropogon flexuosus variety alvicense .
Its local name is `` Gella Pulu `` .
The cultivation of lemongrass requires warm and humid climate , sunshine and 250-300 c.m rain for the entire year .
The amount of oil in the plant increases due to the presence of high temperature and sunshine .
Lemongrass grows in abundance at the hilly places in Kerala where there is heavy rainfall and they are harvested quite early . But the amount of oil and citril content in the plants growing in such regions are quite less as compared to regions with less rainfall .
Clay soil with sand which has good drainage system is best for the growth of this grass .
They grow well in sandy soil with good manure facility .
The winter season in north India is of longer duration than south India because of which the production of lemongrass in north India is quite less .
The saplings prepared from two kilograms of seeds are enough to grow crops in one hectare farm .
Sowing the pieces in more depth is dangerous because `` root rot `` disease might spread during winter season .
This work is done during the beginning of rainy season .
In northern India also plants are planted through root pieces during February but proper irrigation facility is required for them because immediate irrigation after plantation is very essential in these situations .
Planting in small pieces in such a way by leaving spaces depends on the fertility of soil and the climatic condition of that place .
It is very essential to remove the unwanted grass of the farm with the help of axe because it affects the nature of oil and their production .
The grass is burnt during winters to increase the fertility of land and to strengthen the plants .
Lemongrass crop turns the soil and brings out air from the crop .
Not much amount of water is required for lemongrass .
Frequent irrigation is required to get good yield in areas dependent on monsoon .
The production and nature of oil is also affected by the harvesting time .
If the grass is harvested early then the amount of aldehyde in obtained oil is very less -LRB- up to 60-70 % -RRB- and it is less soluble .
But later the amount of aldehyde in oil increases to 75 % and the production of oil also increases .
Commonly the oil production in high rainfall months -LRB- June-August -RRB- is very low as compared to low rainfall areas .
The crop is harvested 3-4 times a year .
The lemongrass crop is cut using a sickle .
The age of lemongrass plants depend on the age of the land and climate .
The average lifespan of plants is 6 years .
During these 6 years , the oil production in the first year is low , the oil production increases in the second year , it increases the most during third and fourth year but gradually later the production starts decreasing .
The seeds are collected during January-February .
The crop is left without cutting for collecting the seeds because the crops that are cut smoothly give relatively less seeds .
The rachis is first cut for collected seeds and then they are allowed to dry in sun for 2-3 days .
Later the rachis is beaten to separate seeds .
These seeds are again dried in sun .
The method used for distillation in Kerala is old fashioned and not popular .
The oil obtained through this method is also of inferior quality because here distillation is done directly or through chimney .
Hence `` Vapor distillation `` method should be used to produce high quality oil .
The grass is cut into small pieces to get maximum production of oil easily .
The production of grass crop and the amount of oil in it depends on the fertility of land , age of cutting grass , condition of grass -LRB- dry or fresh -RRB- and distillation process .
A species of chilotria infects lemongrass .
Their caterpillar is white in color .
The head of the caterpillar is black in color and there are black patches on its body .
It makes hole in the upper half of the plant and eats it while staying there .
It is generally found in the base of the stem .
Drying of the leaves between the stem is its first symptom .
Later gradually the entire plant dries and gets destroyed . Consequently lemongrass production faces huge loss .
The dry stems are burnt during the last days of summer . It kills the caterpillar present in the stem holes .
The oil obtained from actual lemongrass contains 75 % or more fraction of aldehyde .
In India lemongrass is mainly used to separate `` citril `` and producing `` vitamin A `` .
In manufacturing it is used as an initial element .
Lemongrass oil is used to develop taste in goods and preparing cosmetics and perfumed goods .
In some countries lemongrass is used to enhance the taste of food .
At some places it is used in tea and also put in bathing water .
The lemongrass left after use -LRB- the element left after extracting oil -RRB- is used to make paper .
It is used as fuel for distillation .
It is also a good source of fertilizers .
It is either composted to be used as fertilizer or it is burnt and the ashes are used as fertilizers .
Its crop has proved to be helpful in stopping the flow of soil erosion .
Simvopogon vinterianus and simnards oil are popular as citronella oil and commercially available as this name .
`` Java `` variety of oil is obtained by distilling the leaves of sivopogon vinteranius jevit and `` silon `` variety is obtained by distilling the leaves of simvopogon nords randal .
This oil was exported every year from India .
During the recent years there has been reduction in export and now it is being produced in adequate amount in our country .
Warm climate , bright sunshine and 200-250 c.m annual rainfall and the regions which get shower round the year is good for citronella production .
Excess rainfall and acute dryness is also harmful for it .
The growth is less in shady places .
The leaves become tough which reduces oil and jeranial content .
Extreme chilly weather and snowfall adversely affects it .
The job of providing debts is done round the year , not only during sowing and harvesting .
The preparation of annual credit limitation distribution gets wasted where there is lack of agricultural facilities .
The main job of land development banks is to provide debts to members on land mortgage .
They provide credit facilities under following processes by keeping land , building or agricultural equipment in mortgage from the members .
Providing loans to the farmers at cheap interest rates so that do not get exploited by the owners .
