Small pieces of fast growing plants are cut and those which become an year old are called slips.
The pieces which have roots are used for transplantation.
The tough wood of the stem and dry leaves are cut.
It is appropriate to use clean and healthy pieces.
The holes build in the farm should generally have slips with two roots.
This plant grows well in moist place but it gets harmed if the water stays in the roots.
The farming of citronella does not reduce the fertility of the farm but there is considerable increase in the growth of both grass and oil a little bit of chemical fertilizer is mixed with manure.
Before the harvesting the weeds should be properly removed from the farm.
The oil reduces if the harvesting takes more than three months, the reason is that leaves become partially dry.
The leaves should be cut early morning.
The rainy season plants shouldn ` t be cut.
The plant stems should be cut right above the point of growth.
The plants should be cut from beneath once in a year so that dry leaves come out and the bushes remain at proper height.
The leaves are dried a bit to remove excess water.
The drying of the leaves depend upon the intensity of sun and atmospheric conditions.
It is beneficial to keep them in shade for a day.
The leaves are dried on rack in the humid climate so that there is no attack of mildew and fermentation.
The oil production keeps fluctuating in every season. Also soil fertility, agricultural conditions and distillation method play a great role.
The quantity of oil keeps decreasing depending upon the age of the crop in commercial production.
Generally 4-5 years of cultivation in a field are beneficial from economic perspective.
Further, re-transplantation is required.
Cymbopogon martini is a plant of bal gramini family.
It is also known as rosha grass or motiya.
Its another variety is sokia.
Which is also known as ginger grass.
Its oil is even poor than motiya.
The artificial creation of Geraniol has been done and it is being soil in the market, therefore there is reduction in export.
At first motiya was cultivated in Punjab in 1924.
Palmarosa is a multi year perfumed grass.
Good drainage loamy soil is required for this.
Such land where there are means of irrigation and 150 c.m annual rainfall is appropriate for palmarosa.
It cannot be cultivated well in foggy regions.
Being aromatic is a good quality of oil.
Oil quality becomes inferior if weeds come while extracting oil.
Therefore it is essential to remove weeds from the farm.
Every part of the plant has oil.
The flower has the maximum oil content.
The maximum oil from the plant can be extracted at the time of flowering.
This is the appropriate time for harvesting.
Palmarosa farm gives crop for 8 years.
But the production reduces after 4-5 produce.
Palmarosa should be dried for sometime after harvesting and fresh grass should be quickly distilled so that the quality of oil persists.
Though the new variety `` Pusa Basmati 1509 `` developed by Indian agricultural research organization Pusa, New Delhi for increasing the production of Basmati rice has not yet been issued at national level but wit the help of Punjab government this variety has been issued by the organization.
This variety of rice will be named `` Pusa Punjab 1509 `` .
Has not been given the status of Basmati: Agricultural scientists are excited on its introduction into Punjab but they are worried because it has not got the status of Basmati on technical parameters.
Actually the central government gives this status to a variety when that Basmati producer is appropriate for production is every region.
The genetics department of the institution has developed the new variety in the form of `` Pusa Basmati 1121 `` .
This is the highest producing variety of Basmati in the country but `` Pusa Basmati 1509 `` has been developed because of the bakanae disease.
The scientists say that this variety is appropriate for all the Basmati producing regions but this variety could not be issued at national level as the rice research directorate(DRR, Hyderabad)did not encourage it.
The institution contacted Delhi government and Punjab government at local level.
A meeting could not be held in this department of Delhi government because of which it was released early in Punjab.
The director of the institution Dr. H.S. Gupta said that the farmers are given one kilogram of packets of seeds in Punjab.
While the head of Genetics department Dr. Vinod Prabhu said that this variety will be prepared 20 days early than other varieties.
This will save water.
And the produce will be equal to `` Pusa Basamati 1121 `` .
Its rice is better than 1121 therefore the exporters ` organization has also accepted it.
Takhana and Padhana are two small villages of Karnal district.
Majority of the farmers here grow tomatoes.
They have become so skilled in this talent that the farmers from far-flung areas come here to learn.
Not only this the money lenders who hesitated in giving money to the farmers are now compelled to buy goods from their village.
The money lenders of UP also come here to buy vegetables.
The farmers of the village do not want to indulge in the wheat-paddy cultivation because of other vegetables other than tomatoes.
Farmer Ramdas and Vikram singh said that in 1986 some farmers heard that a farmer near Jhajjar is growing tomatoes worth millions of rupees.
When the farmers went to see the farm we also liked that idea.
We thought that if a farmer can get so much profit on an undulated ground near Jhajjar, then why can ` t we do it?
And this persistence turned up their destiny.
Initially they started to cultivate tomatoes on some acres of land after which they never looked back.
Farmer Man singh, Naresh Kumar, birju, Ghanshayam, Praveen,Banwari and others say that initially people hesitated to lend money to the farmers of this area but after starting the cultivation of tomatoes and vegetables they do not even need it.
At around two thousand acres of land of both the villages, tomatoes are cultivated twice a year.
The grading and packing of goods begin as soon as the farmers reach the market in the evening with their produce.
The farmers from other states have also started holding their foot in the villages of Chattisgarh.
The farmers of Haryana and Punjab have particularly bought these lands for cultivation.
This progression endlessly continues.
At Some places they have possessed small holdings while at other places they have large holdings.
When Bhaskar investigated it then he came to know that Ajit Singh, the union civil aviation minister and Rashtriya lokdal chief who lives in Bagpar, Uttar Pradesh has also bought land in Berla block of Bemetara district.
In 1990 he bought land on his name and again in 2006 he bought it on his son Jayant Singh ` s name.
Ajeet Singh is just a symbol.
Millions of farmers such as Gurnam Singh Tarar, Karam singh, Rajkumar Panghal, Ranveer singh from Haryana and Punjab have bought lands here.
Some are selling their ancestral land or arranging money to buy lands at different areas of the state.
Gurnam singh Tarar from Yamuna nagar, Haryana came to Chattisgarh in 2006.
Along with his brothers he bought 108 acres land in suhaila, Balauda bazar.
He is getting 600 tonnes paddy, 800 tonnes wheat and 22 thousand tonnes sugarcane produce from this land.
There is a mango orchard in 13 acres of land.
Kurukshetra ` s Karam singh bought 42 acres of land in Khapradih and Sarseni in the year 2000.
He is cultivating paddy, wheat and vegetables with his three brothers.
The CAG report has given a blow to the central government who patted its back with the growth of one and a quarter million crore rupees in agricultural debts in 2013-14 general budget.
According to the CAG report presented in the parliament, it investigated 90,576 accounts out of the total number of accounts.
Out of the them there were faults in 20,242 accounts.
As per this calculation one can say that there were irregularities in 22.34 % matters.
In the investigation it was found that many farmers who did not deserve it were freed from debts while many deserving farmers did not get its benefit and the banks dismissed their claims.
CAG has also found evidences of tampering with documents and presenting fake documents.
CAG has reprimanded the department of financial services for not monitoring the debt exemption properly.
In order to release the farmers from institutional debts the government had implemented agricultural debt waiver and debt relief scheme, 2008.
Under this 3.69 billion small and 60 million other farmers were released from debt worth 52,516 billion rupees.
This scheme played a major role in re-bringing UPA into power.
Though the fresh CAG reports have brought the congress in unnatural situation which is busy preparing for general elections but the fake game in agricultural loans has started right after UPA came into power when agricultural loans were increased and interest rates were cut.
For example in 2004, agricultural loan worth 86,000 billion rupees were allocated which increased to 5,75,000 billion rupees in 2011-12.
For the past eight years there was not only six time increase in agricultural loans but more loans were allocated as compared to other years.
81 % small and marginal farmers hardly got 5% loans.
Big farmers, business and industrialists got the rest of the cream.
The agricultural loan(32,400 billion rupees) that Delhi and Chandigarh got in 2009-10 was even more than the total agricultural loan(31,000 billion rupees) provided to Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal and Jharkhand.
It was done by bringing changing in the definition of agricultural loans so that the loan given to business associated with agriculture and concerned activities, industrialists, governmental institutions etc are also brought under the boundaries of agricultural loans.
Not only this the share of co-operative institutions which are considered to be the friends of farmers in agricultural loans reduced to 12 % from 62 % in the year 1993-94 to 2009.
Thus the regional rural banks started giving priorities to benefit after reconstitution.
The consequence was increased dependence of many farmers on money lenders and small loan institutions which ultimately became the reason for farmers ` suicide.
According to the National bureau of crime records, 2,90,470 farmers committed suicide during 1995-2010.
During April-May for new crops farmers mostly need the loan because they have to arrange from seeds and manures before monsoon.
Thus as a norm during these two months of the financial year more agricultural loans should be allocated but the figures of NABARD speak a different story.
According to this during April, 2009 to January, 2010 agricultural sector had a debt of 3 lakh crore rupees but by March, 2010 it directly rose from 5 lakh crore to 8 lakh crore rupees.
And in the next month it again became 3 lakh crore rupees.
The NABARD chairman himself believes that during kharif season the farmers should take 50-60% loan but there is no relationship of general season of the crops between the allocated loans and their repayment.
D. Subbarao, the governor of reserve bank has accepted that the agricultural loan for subsidy is being used in other works.
As a result despite allocating more loans than the declared goal, the dependence of farmers on money lenders is not decreasing.
During 2000-2010 there was 755 % increase in the loans given to agricultural sector but during this time there was merely an increase of 18% in agricultural produce.
According to Reserve Bank two factors are responsible for this.
The first is that while giving loans the banks give preference to big farmers because there is not much risk with them.
Since the farmers who return loan get loans merely at the rate of 4% therefore the big farmers get loan from the banks and give them to small farmers at the rate of 15-20%.
The figures of the finance ministry also testify it.
For example the share of small farmers in the total loans allocated in 2007 was just 3.77%.
During 2010-11 the loan given to agricultural sector increased 2.5 times and became 5,09,000 crore rupees but only 5.71% share went with the small farmers.
Secondly, the banks do not refrain from manipulating the accounts in order to reach the targets of agricultural loan in last two months of the financial year.
Clearly when small and marginal farmers are not getting loans then from where does the question of remittance arise?
In such a situation not only in remittance of debt but there is scam in loan allocation also before which scams like national games, 2G spectrum and coal gate seems to be small.
Seeing the bumper production of wheat in rabi season, the government is unable to breath because of the shortage of storage.
Majority of the government and personal granaries are flooded with the grains of last year.
The government can take the decision of exporting 50 lakh tonnes of wheat to vacate the granaries.
The committee of cabinet ministers of financial affairs will consider this proposal by food ministry on Thursday.
Agriculture minister Sharad Pawar said that only few weeks are left for the arrival of new season ` s wheat.
Seeing the dearth of granaries it is essential to take decision on this.
Pawar was talking to journalists after participating in the agriculture science fair.
It is not possible to store the wheat of new crop unless vacating the granaries for which sufficient granaries are needed.
Seeing the dearth of pulses and oil-seeds Pawar asked the agricultural scientists to develop advanced variety of seeds.
Due to less production of oil-seeds 50 % of edible oil demand is fulfilled with import.
The import dependence of pulses is also persistently increasing.
CCEA will consider the proposal on export of wheat.
Further, discussions on permitting the private exporters for exporting wheat will also be held in the meeting.
But only those private businessmen can get export permission who will export the wheat of government stocks.
Nodal agencies like MMTC, STC and PEC are also in the list of exporters.
The government has already given the permission of export worth 45 lakh tonne wheat to these agencies.
Out of which more than 20 lakh tonnes of wheat has been exported at the rate of 295-330 dollar/tonne.
The value for the export of wheat was decided by inter-ministerial committee under the chairmanship of commerce secretary S. R. Rao.
Punajb, Haryana and Madhya Pradesh where still the older stock exists will be mostly relieved by the the export relief on this extra amount of wheat.
On 1st February of Central pool, the granaries of these three states had a stock of 3.08 crore tonne wheat.
This essential stock is too much as compared to 1.12 crore tonnes.
Because of the huge increase in bumper production and governmental purchase the stock of wheat has greatly increased.
The goal of Rabi purchase beginning from April has been decided.
During 2011-12 the record production of wheat was 9.48 crore tonnes.
The production of wheat in the current season is believed to be 9.23 crore tonnes.
Eucalyptus is an ornamental tree with its unique bark, circular stem, extended branches and crown of leaves.
It was founded by Joseph Czech in 1770 which was received from the eastern coast of Australia during the first brave journey of Captain James in Pacific Ocean.
It was named Eucalyptus in 1770 by the French botany.
Its two words `` U `` means well and `` calyptus `` means which covers which is `` lid of well `` .
Its specialty is that while flowering a cap like structure is built on the buds.
Though this species originates from Australia but many of its species have been brought in tropical and temperate countries.
Some of these species yield best quality of wood and some other varieties are used in the preparation of industrial medicine and perfume industry for making best quality oil.
The use of Eucalyptus in perfume industry was done after the invention of aromatic oil (1882).
The trees are called colossal or mallige as per the nature and size of the trees.
Large size species such as U. K. ranges are world wide popular for tough wood.
Eucalyptus citriodora is a long and straight growing long lived tree which is 20 met high.
Later it grows soft leaves which are ornamental.
As compared to other crops, climatic conditions play a major role in preparing sapling by useful tree plantation from economic point of view.
Appropriate humidity along with moderate air temperature is good for its initial growth.
The seeds do not sprout until the temperature is not appropriate that is not much, nor too less.
The best sprouting takes place during mid February till April and the other is during July-November when the temperature is between 15-30 degree C.
The humid climate during July-September is also not good for sprouting because the death rate increases due to the fungal attack of several kinds and heavy rains also harm small plants.
The plant growth becomes moderate at less than 15 degree c and proportionately at zero degree C plants die.
U citriodora plants are very sensitive towards chilling weather and especially the small plants.
If the height of the transplanted plants is increased then the ability of tropical structures to resist force decreases.
Therefore in order to get good results the basic seeds should be properly monitored as per height while sowing during transplantation.
Acidic or saline soil which has some carbon elements is good for this.
Submerged and wet soil is not good for this, transplantation should not take place here.
Extremely dense humus rich soil is not essential for the nursery but while transplantation humus rich soil is extremely essential.
The land should be tilled twice-thrice and the raft should be properly run.
Lamellar cultivation should be properly tilled and irrigated after putting fertilizers.
If possible a handful of cow dung manure should be put in every pit before transplantation.
Its seeds are very small and 240 seeds weigh 1 gram.
Only thick and healthy seeds should be sown, dry, shrunk seeds should be thrown.
According to atmospheric temperature and humidity seeds begin to sprout within 4-14 days.
Either nursery should be prepared with an objective of growing commercial farming or it is appropriate to propagate plant by directly sowing the seeds in appropriate season.
The nursery should be established in high beds.
Permeable sandy soil is best for nursery while smooth and wet soil should not be used for this purpose.
While sowing one should be careful that the seeds are not sown more than 1 cm. deep and at an improper place.
The plants can be grown directly in the bags.
In every bag around 10 seeds are sown and are mixed into the soil and irrigated.
The plants thus grown are made light for 2-6 months according to the height.
This method is more convenient and useful than the conventional method.
The benefit is that the double expenditure on preparing the nursery in farms and then transferring them into the farms is saved.
Further the risk of plant death in bags is also not there.
After 2-6 months, seeing the climatic condition, when the plants grown in bags become 30 cm long are best for transplantation.
Cracks should be made in poly bags during this period or it should be completely removed and then the sprouts should be used for transplantation with mud balls.
One should not tamper the roots that they become too small and deep pits should be dug for this purpose.
It should be filled with soil all around and properly irrigated.
Delay in irrigation can lead to obstacle in growth and can reduce the condiment herb.
August-September is not good for transplantation in regions with extremely cold condition.
Once when the plants survive then they have the capacity to tolerate any kind of adverse condition in the coming seasons and are also able to tolerate the losses happening in winter.
Satisfying figures of a specific variety of fertilizer for Eucalyptus clan or U. Citriodora species have yet not been available.
While manures with nitrogen have proved to be helpful in its growth where remarkable growth in per unit area in oil quantity has been seen.
While there is no direct relationship between fertilizer use in leaves and growth in oil quantity.
No consent is given for its regular use until there is specific scarcity of these elements in the soil.
It should be kept in mind that there is adequate amount of oil in crop leaves and the weather should also be desirable.
Cloudy and rainy days are inappropriate for trimming.
6-8 months old plants should be taken for first trimming.
Although in this situation there is relative reduction in the amount of oil but frequent trimming can increase the growth of leaves.
The number of branches also increase which leads to incessant growth in production and this sequence continues in 3 year old plants.
First trimming should be 30-45 above ground and again it should be cut 75-90 cm above ground.
Generally three crops are taken from the plants so that more oil is obtained.
This condition is best during mid February, mid March, mid July and then at the end of October and beginning of November.
It gives an interval of four months for the arrival of new leaves.
After two years only one plant should be allowed to remain in every pit so that new branches and saplings get appropriate nutrition and place while growing.
Thin leaves are appropriate for distillation.
The herb should be passed through distillation process as soon as possible.
Leaves get dry while storing or gets rotten because of reversing. It reduces the oil extraction capacity.
One cannot suggest from economic point of view that leaves should be kept away from branches.
The leaves and soft stems should be in the proportion of 7:3.
The herb obtained from irrigated area yields an average of 200 ml oil while the oil obtained from non-irrigated area is 150 l.
Apart from oil one hectare of plant yields 11 tonnes of dry wood which is used in paper industry and it also gives fuel.
It should be carefully noted that immediately after harvesting the herb should be distilled so that there is no fear of oil evaporation and no qualitative loss during storage.
Oil floats on water after condensation and it can easily be separated from water.
Although Australia has quite good knowledge about multiple Eucalyptus diseases but there is not a serious problem in India yet.
At some places there is fury of termites.
If the land becomes dry for a longer period then the termite eats the roots and stem bark because of which the plants dies soon.
Crawling caterpillar eats the leaves of U. Citriodora.
In order to get rid of them from time B.H.C should be regularly sprinkled.
Fungal diseases also harm Eucalyptus.
The disease increases also because of the excess humus containing capacity of the land and in a single night the entire nursery becomes disease prone.
Cole tritium species also attack the leaves.
Apart from the above mentioned diseases some viral diseases reduce the size of leaves which is known as filodi.
In this the leaves become light red or yellow and other patches arise.
The plants that show signs should be immediately pluck and destroyed.
The perfumed oils obtained from them give the fragrance of camphor, peppermint, rose or lemon.
The oil is used in medicinal industries such as -anti-contagious, hygiene factor and fragrance industry etc.
Its increasing demand depends on the active element citronella present in it.
The major factor of the oil is in fact citronella.
The price of the oil will depend on the amount of citronella found in it.
Its oil is color less and sweet in taste.
The oil is mainly used in industries and hydroxy citronyl and menthol are prepared from this only.
The fragrance of insecticide and living factor elements can be increased by mixing a little amount of oil in it.
It is an effective substitute and supplement of Java citronella oil.
It is used in soap industry and in the preparation of cosmetics,
The wood of U. citriodora is used in making houses and in mines.
It is also used in paper making industry.
Erbal Moskam Maskotsalin is a plant of `` malvesi `` species similar to lady ` s finger.
The musk seeds are generally called `` ambrit `` seeds.
Its seeds smell like musk.
The seed cover yield extremely valuable oil.
The vaporized oil oil is called musk seed oil or ambrit seed oil which is used in high quality expensive perfume and tobacco.
This seed is extremely useful and there is great demand for them in overseas markets.
Its seeds have anti-infectious stimulus, cooling, nutritious, laxative and transpiration values.
During itching and snake bite the seed paste is mixed with milk and rubbed at the affected area.
National botanical garden, Lucknow has developed a new process to separate aromatic elements from the seeds.
During this process the fine powder of seeds are extracted with cold alcohol.
The recycling of percolator ` s battery yield `` concentrated alcohol `` .
It is cooled and aqueous alcoholic fraction is separated from ether.
The fraction when washed with dilute alkali yields perfumed absolute.
Later the solvent is separated.
The cooling process separates the sterile part from the absolute.
In India this seed is not cultivated at large scale.
Yet some amount of seeds is received from north, north-east and middle India.
Extreme chilly weather is most harmful for this therefore its farming is forbidden in cold regions during winter.
Around 1200-1400 ml.m rain is appropriate for it.
This plant grows well in loamy fertile soil.
The water should not stand in the land and the drainage should be proper.
15th June to 15th July is the best time to sow their seeds, though it can be grown in spring, summer or rainy season.
In order to get good crop, 25 tonnes of cow dung and 1.5-2 tonnes of ammonia sulfate per hectare should be put in the farm.
Until the beginning of rains, irrigation should be regularly done in January-February and March.
There is no need for weeding after the plants grow fully.
Mosaic infects leaves .
The monkeys also pluck and eat raw fruits and plants.
The rats eat ripe seeds.
Apart from them, no other diseases and insects have yet attacked Lucknow farms.
Though the epidemic of insects that eat stems seem to destroy this plant which destroys the stems.
Humulus Lupuluslin is a multi year climber plant of `` moresi `` species.
Which is commonly known as hops.
Its female plant is valuable for its inflorescence.
The inflorescence are used in bringing special fragrance and taste in liquor , making edible items tasty and keeping them safe for longer duration.
These specific characteristics found in inflorescence are because of the chemicals of lupulin glands present in their cones.
This part of inflorescence are considered to be hypnotic, nutritive and comfortable.
Currently hops are cultivated in around 20 countries from commercial point of view.
During the fifth decade of 20th Century there were around 6 liquor producing mills in India.
The hops requirements of these mills is met by importing them.
The requirement and consumption of hops in India is perpetually increasing because the development of liquor industry is sweepingly increasing.
Around more than 70 businessmen have been provided license for the manufacture of liquor.
In order to reduce the amount and value of import and become independent it is essential to develop its cultivation in Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh and its cultivation should be tried at other places also.
For the first time there were efforts to plant these crops in Dehradun which were obtained from Lord Auckland in 1840.
But because of heavy rainfall during the flowering stage, the cone and lupulin growth gets adversely affected.
Luther had suggested for the entry of hops in Kashmir in 1851.
It is also grown in Chamba(Himachal Pradesh).
Hops was of high quality and it received a medal during an exhibition in Amsterdam.
The commercial farming of hops introduced in Kashmir in 19th century was done by Kashmir horticultural department in Dobaga, northern Kashmir.
Shimla does not have appropriate favorable environment for the cultivation of hops yet there were efforts for cultivating it here.
Actually diseases and insects do not harm hops in Shimla.
In India hops are nowhere cultivated at commercial scale.
Hops is sensitive towards light and their successful commercial cultivation could be only done in warm climate of tropical regions on both the sides of 34 degree latitude, Mediterranean.
Presence of such kind of climate and latitude is found at some places of Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh.
Soft loamy soil whose pH value is 6-8 is considered good for hops.
Hops is grown from seeds and stems.
The plants that grow from seeds take more time in flowering.
The flowers are less valuable.
Hops are only grown through stems for commercial farming.
The stems should be disease free.
The trimming of hops are essential.
The trimming begins during spring season.
The trimming is done using sharp knife.
Weeding should be done after trimming.
One should understand that it is the time to pluck when the flowers become light yellow-green and crisp, and easy to pluck.
In Kashmir the flowers get ready to be plucked during end of August till September.
The entire plucking should be done within 10 days after the flowers become mature.
Delay in plucking make flowers more crisp.
The regional research laboratory, Jammu made active programs for the study of cultivation, generation,chemicals, harvesting etc. of hops and began their work in Srinagar and Kashmir branch laboratories.
In this concern, different countries producing hops brought various species and prepared its germplasm.
The cultivation of some of its species is good in the climate of Kashmir.
Jasmine flowers have a special significance in Indian culture.
This plant is appreciated for its extremely fragrant flowers.
They are grown in all the tropical and subtropical regions of the world.
In India, its plants are found since ancient times but the origin is said to be some western country.
In south India Jasmine flowers are used in the manufacture of cream, soaps and cosmetics.
According to researchers in China Jasmine flowers are used as anti depressant in tea.
In Malaya its flowers are used to make coconut fibers fragrant.
There is a yellow saffron in their flower.
Which is used as a substitute to saffron.
The lotion prepared from their flowers are used to wash face and eyes.
Around 15 varieties of jasmine are found.
Which include single and double petal flower variety.
Which are known by different names in different parts.
Pearl Jasmine is a popular variety whose leaves are around 9 c.m. long and 6 c.m. wide.
The flowers are around 3 c.m. wide in Lucknow ` s climate which has four layers of petal.
Arabian Jasmine `` Their plants are bushy and flowers are white and fragrant.
Their flowers are available in north India from April-June.
Kahmir Jasmine : Their bushy plants have been quite successful on unproductive land.
They have proved to be quite fertile.
April-June is the time for flowers in north India.
Jasmine also requires good fertile loamy soil.
They grow well in open and sunny areas.
Jasmine is only grown through stems and pressure.
Trimming is quite essential because it hugely impacts flower production.
Irrigation should be stopped before trimming.
Old, dry branches should be removed by cutting.
The trimming should be done 45 c.m. from above.
Borazine paste should be applied on the branches after trimming so that they do not catch fungus and insects.
The jasmine flower petals are fragrant due to the presence of volatile oils.
The fragrance begins as soon as the flower opens.
Gundumali variety is best for concrete.
The jasmine concrete are less popular abroad.
The entire method of extracting concrete from 3 kgs. of Jasmine flowers every time have been found in Tamil Nadu agricultural University.
These plants grow as shrubs up to 1500-4200 m height towards west in Himachal Pradesh.
sometimes they are also seen in the form of small trees.
The bark is like red-brown paper patches.
This plant is extremely transforming and its multiple physical and garden varieties are found.
During March-April the plants start flowering and fruits ripe next year during August-September.
Birds eat its fruits in natural condition and help in spreading their seeds.
Juniper fruits have gin like smell and the taste is like colophony oil which later becomes bitter.
The fruits are sometimes used in distilling gin and edible items and some sometimes for eating.
The fruits are widely used in making liquor in European countries.
Dry fruits of Juniper are sold in north India.
Juniper oil is extracted by vapor distillation of ripe fruits.
0.8-1.6 % of oil is extracted as per the quality of distilled fruits.
The oil extracted from raw green fruits is of inferior quality and the oil of fresh ripe fruits becomes a kind of raisin.
Major part of the commercial oil is received as a byproduct of alcoholic distillation.
They do not have natural oxygenated smelling compounds.
Juniper oil is clean colorless or yellow-green liquid.
Which has clinical fruit smell and sharp taste.
The oil when kept for long gives sticky and colophony smell.
Juniper oil is mostly used in integrated taste aroma of integrated gin and nutritional medicines.
Refined oil has high quality flavor.
Duplicate juniper oils are also manufactured.
The left over fruit polks are used to feed animals.
The ashes contain potassium and calcium in abundance.
All the parts of juniper trees contain vaporizing oil.
The tree also ejects certain kind of chemical .
Which stands at the bark.
Its confusing senderak is considered equivalent to glue.
Shining yellow oil is extracted from top branches and needles(20 degree F, 0.8531),(availability 0.15-0.18%), which has specific aroma of juniper oil.
Commercial juniper wood oil is generally prepared by distilling juniper wood, branches with colophony oil.
Mostly it is the mixture of colophony and juniper oil.
Juniper wood(weight 528 mg) is almond like, somewhat tough, aromatic and could be easily irrigated.
It is generally found in small size and used in making hedge, beams and used as fuel.
Juniper grows well in sandy and loamy wet soil.
It can also grow in graveled and rocky land.
Its plants are prepared by locking stems on seeds, stems etc.
The seeds are able to grow for years.
After sowing the sprouting takes around one years time.
The plants start flowering during April-May and fruits ripe during August-September.
Oil cab be extracted from all the parts of the plant but oil is extracted mainly from the ripe fruits.
The rate of its fruit oil is overseas countries is around 9000 Rs/kg.
Indian juniper grows in scattered form in low rainfall regions, dry stones or graveled land.
It grows densely only in favorable wet soil with shade.
The plant starts flowering during spring and bear fruits next year during September-October.
This tree contains a chemical which spreads particularly in dry stones therefore it can stand even in storms but at open spaces these trees become dwarf and stiff.
It can remain both dry and wet.
It can even tolerate lowest of temperatures.
The growth level can be exceeded in extremely favorable conditions.
The trees get harmed due to loss of bark but wood fungus, fomes juniperinus saccardi and sido attack them.
It is difficult to get clean wood but if found it is easy to cut them.
Generally their wood is stiff and it causes difficulty in cutting.
It can be easily refined.
The wood is mostly used in making pencils.
After testing all Indian woods, they have proved to be best for this purpose but we do not get as much wood as we require.
The wood is used in building construction, in making sticks and bowls and such other works.
They are also used in the form of fuel and coal is also prepared from them.
This oil was used at the place of juniper oil during second world war.
In order to make them aromatic we should remove pinine out of it because it smells like colophony.
Levendula ofisenilis lin is a permanent bushy plant of `` leviati `` family.
It has almost 28 species and multiple hybrids too.
There are several species of lavender which grow at different places.
The lavendula officinalis is found from Mediterranean sea till Kashmir.
The leaves are hairy, long and green colored.
The stems are straight and flowers appear on branch free free stems in bunches.
The flowers are light purple in color.
Oil is extracted from these flowers.
Bees linger on the flowers to collect honey.
Lavender is a valuable oil and it was not yet produced in India.
Therefore it was imported from abroad for use in Indian perfume business.
Lavandula is a temperate plant and it grows on those places which are cool and where the climate is cool even during summers.
Its roots are quite deep.
Therefore it can even grow on sloping hills.
Lavender grows well in Kashmir.
It needs light loamy sandy soil rich in calcium.
Lavender is circulated in three ways.
From seeds, stems and by separating the roots of plants.
The yield of 10-12 year old farms decrease and plants deteriorates.
Therefore it is essential that the plants are again revived.
Doing this is easy during November-February when the plants are dormant.
During this time the plants should be trimmed at a height of 4-5 c.m above the ground and the fertilizers should be properly provided so that the plants grow quickly and give good yield.
The plants grow soon in lower warm valleys.
Harvesting should be done when 75-90 % of the flowers appear.
Harvesting should not be done during fog and rains, it should be done in dry weather.
12-14 c.m long stems with flowers should be cut.
The branches do not have oil, only flowers have oil.
The amount and quality of oil in lavender depends on fertility of soil, harvesting, storage at proper time etc.
The oil is extracted from fresh flowers through vaporization.
The flowers should not be stored for too long.
The obtainment of oil from the flowers depends on appropriate climate, timely harvesting, proper transportation at vaporizing place and total vaporization.
Fresh flowers give 0.7-0.9% of oil.
Shere Kashmir `` This species starts giving crop from the second year itself and gets ready 12-15 days early from the karlo species.
It has more flowers and gives more oil.
96 kgs. of oil is obtained from 1 hectare.
Efforts are on to make high quality species now.
Lavender can be successfully grown on the hills of U.P.
Matrikeria Kamomila is a plant of `` compositi `` species.
Its white flowers have mild fascinating fragrance.
Its oil has chamomile and alolis elements which are used in medicines.
The flower soup has proved to be useful for patients with stomach ailment.
They are also used to lighten hairs.
Its dry flowers are spread in room to spread aroma.
A fraction of oil is also used in the solution to be used for bathing which leads to freshness and peace in human body.
Its oil is also used in arthritis, stomach piles and cramps.
This oil is mostly used in several kinds of mild fragrance of lavender which is fascinating .
It is also used in liquor.
It is used in giving fragrance to soaps that is why there is a great demand for its oil.
For the last three years its rate in European market was between 30,000/- to 35,000/- rupees per kilogram.
It proves that it is among one of the very expensive oils.
The liquor producing farms of our country also imports it from abroad.
It is planted in European countries like France, Yugoslavia, Hungary etc.
This plant can be properly grown at a height of 200-700 metre.
It can tolerate extremely cool weather.
It can be grown properly in smooth and loamy soil which has good amount of bio manure.
It cannot grow in highly alkaline soil but they grow well in alkaline soil with 9-9.5 pH value.
It has been known through the tests of Bathra, Research Center, Lucknow that this plant has the capacity to absorb salt.
It proves that this plant is useful for alkaline soil.
The seeds can be directly sown into the farms.
For this it is essential for the farm to be extremely moist.
After properly removing the roots of kharif crop, the farm should be properly tilled.
If there is less moisture in the farm them they should be planted.
After two years to testing it has been proved that flower production increases with the amount of nitrogen and phosphorous.
Hence chemical fertilizers should also be used.
It is also seen that the amount of chimozalin increases in oil.
Crop cycle is essential for good production of any crop.
The plants start flowering from the second week of March.
It is good to delay its plucking in the first week so that during harvesting there is abundance of complete flowers.
They always have buds and complete flowers therefore while plucking only complete flowers should be plucked.
More flowers are obtained during second and third spring.
A human can everyday pluck up to 3-8 kg flowers.
6000-7000 kg flowers are obtained from 1 hectare area.
There is 65-75 % moisture in the flowers and 0.2-0.8 % oil is extracted.
The amount of oil decreases if the flowers are not dried properly after plucking.
Thus the flowers should be spread and dried in plain and clean surface in layers in shade.
The flowers should be never dried in excess heat.
The flowers in Lucknow catches insect during rainy season which eats and harms the flowers.
After the last plucking of flowers the the plant should be allowed to stand in farms for the farm seeds and care of the plants should be taken.
All the flowers should be plucked and dried when the flowers become yellow.
Mentha orvensis is a plant of `` leviati `` species which is of Japanese origin.
In India it was first planted in Jammu & Kashmir in 1952 and it completely adjusted in Indian climate.
Nowadays it has become a plant of best economic importance in many states.
Japanese mint can be easily identified because of these characteristics.
It is a creeper which grows through roots on nodes in the earth on the ground .
There are white patches on stems, leaves and corolla.
The leaves are like spears whose other side is triangular teeth shaped.
Menthol grows well in several kinds climate.
Low height tropical regions are considered best for its cultivation.
This crop grows well in continuous adequate rain areas but good sun little rainfall is beneficial during harvesting.
The crop is grown through best method of vegetative propagation.
It gets accomplished by underground runners.
They should be chosen from healthy plants which are free from gerui disease.
If it is essential to keep the saplings for some time then they should be kept in wet sacks and properly covered with soil.
It keeps planting ingredients in good condition.
The plants can also be grown through sowing.
They are grown in nursery beds.
The plants should be sown in only those beds which have fresh, fertile soil full of carbonic elements.
In north India sowing is done during January-February.
The runners should be kept together or their heads should be attached with each other and covered with soil.
The runners can be spread more with the help of plants arising out of underground sack saplings sown in farms.
Now farmers love to sow using transplantation.
Menthol can also be planted after the harvesting of wheat or potato.
The transplanted crop gives more and good produce for next year ` s transplantation.
It needs more irrigation.
There is no need for irrigation in rains if there are timely rains.
The flower quality is good and the crop also grows well if irrigation is done right after plantation and harvesting.
For more profit from economic point of view, weeding and deep tilling using tillers should be done during last week of April.
Special care should be taken while crop harvesting because of improper cutting leads to reduction in amount of oil.
The number of cutting every year according to the climate should be 2-3.
The time when the plant is densely spread is good for solution and more amount of oil. Harvesting should be done during this time.
If the cutting is done on time then the amount of menthol decreases and if there is delay in cutting then also the the amount of oil decreases due to drying of leaves.
During the beginning of infection, dead patches appear on underground saplings which later become dark brown and finally lead to rotting.
The leaves turn yellow and later get destroyed by drying.
The infected plant should be removed from roots and destroyed.
Sowing ingredients should not be taken from infected farm.
Mint plants should be planted at the lines in order to stop water logging.
The plants to be planted should be chemically sterilized.
Total prevention has not been identified yet.
Khua disease:- It occurs due to a fungus named yaksinia menthipers.
The first symptom of disease occurs during spring which shows stem swelling , curling , drying of leaves etc.
Bacteria make brown round patches on the leaves of mint plants.
The leaves curl and turn yellow when uradia is present on the leaves and later fall turning brown.
Uradia leads to tilia during the beginning of autumn or winter.
Uktha disease:- This disease generally begins during summers.
The infection continuously spreads from one plant to another and from one farm to another.
This disease spreads during irrigation water and infected underground saplings during plantation.
Crop cycle does not affect it because fungus remains inside the ground for several years.
Termite attack mint plants when the farm is not moist.
Termite attack increases with little irrigation.
Caterpillar eating leaves and insect curling leaves(singaemia akerfatsil) harms mint.
Recently some discoveries have been made in this direction under which anti weeds chemicals are used but the right solution is crop cycle.
Potato or wheat crop should be sown after mint during August-September.
This crop ripens during March.
Then after maize is sown, it gets ready in three months and then paddy is sown.
It is harvested during November so that mint should be grown again in January.
The profit can be increased more by growing potatoes after second harvesting of mint.
The farmers get profit by menthol cultivation but the profit can be more by growing new varieties.
Shivalik:- This is a Chinese plant and has so much of oil and menthol.
Himalaya:- This is a new developed species of menthol.
The cleansing point(CP)and amount of menthol found in oil determine the price of menthol.
Till 1984, majority of the demand for menthol for was met through productions based on mint.
As a result of increase in menthol oil and production of menthol during last decade, not only the internal demands were met but India also started exporting it.
Thus the menthol producers of India have occupied around 30-40% market in 1992-93 as compared to China which has now increased to 80-90%.
Menthol crystal of grains are made out of menthol oil after distillation which has great demand in both national and international markets.
These grains are of two kinds- `` plaque `` and `` bold `` .
Bold grains are more significant in terms of both taste and fragrance.
The left over mentholized oil after separating the menthol grains is either sold as it is in the market or other elements like tarpin, menthon and liquid are made from them.
Currently only two states Uttar Pradesh and Punjab are growing menthol at large scale.
For the last 25-30 years Uttar Pradesh has been successfully doing menthol farming.
The regions where menthol is cultivated fall under subtropical climate.
There are several states of India where subtropical climate is available such as Madhya Pradesh, Bihar, Haryana and Punjab.
Menthol can be successfully cultivated on the basis of soil and climatic conditions and availability.
You know that while cultivating the first thing that should be looked upon is the land type and its reform.
The land where cultivation is carried is of seven kinds.
Sandy land:- The land where sand and other elements are in the ratio 3:4 or the land which has 10-20 hundred portion of smooth soil is called sandy soil.
Clay loamy soil:- It is also called smooth soil.
The land which has three part of smooth soil and one part of other elements is called smooth soil or clay loamy soil.
Loamy :- The land which has half of sand and more than half smooth soil is called loamy soil.
Sandy Loamy- The land which has more than half of sand and 20-40/hundred portion of smooth soil is called sandy loamy soil.
Clay Soil- The land which has 85-95/hundred smooth soil and rest of the elements are sand is called clay soil, dakar or smooth loamy soil.
Barren- The land which is never tilled and sown is called barren.
Such land is very dry.
They can also be used for cultivation if regular hard work is done.
They are also known as Padti kadeem.
Sterile- Nothing can be grown in such land.
They contain more of alkaline.
Generally not even grass can grow in this land.
This land can also be fit for cultivation if hard work is done.
Excreta manure is really golden manure.
The effects are amazing.
It makes barren lands, fertile and cultivable.
It completely removes useless trees and shrubs.
You must have seen that the surrounding crops of village where people excrete is always green.
It gives more yield as compared to far flung farms.
China is the first to move forward in this concern.
Prof. King of America has written a significant volume named `` Farmers of fourty centuries `` .
He has shown that despite continuous cultivation for the past 4000 years the fertility of the soil is still intact there.
The reason is that the country doesn ` t wastes even a handful of excreta.
The toilet excreta is sold through contract in cities.
Then manure is made out of them and then they are provided to the farmers.
The farmers use them in their farms.
Therefore the condition of agriculture in China is better than all the countries of the world.
Belgium and France have understood the significance of excreta and urine manure much before.
In order to remove the bad smell from them in France either coal ash or sulfuric acid is added.
Later it is dried in heat and then used as manure.
Excreta and urine manure is even used in England.
There the excreta and urine is dried and in order to remove the bad smell a bird called guano is put in it and then the manure mixture is used.
India has around 32 crore villages.
On an average a person everyday consumes 1.5 or 2 ratal grains.
As per this calculation around 60-62 crore ratal grains in a day is spent from entire India.
If the rate of this grain is at least counted as 20 ser every rupee then every year the entire India requires grains worth Rs.1,80,0000000.
Further a lot of grains of India is also sent to abroad.
This is o say that if we do not count the grain that is exported then also every year we get grains worth 1,80,0000000 rupees.
Excreta and urine is produced from a large part of grains consumed.
If we do not throw this excreta and urine and use them as manure then we can regain the health of the farm which is lost by excessive cultivation.
It is said that the fertility of Indian land is day by day decreasing.
The reason is that we take so many things from the land but we do not supply them with proper diet.
India has large number of Neem trees.
The small fruits that Neem bears are known as nimboli in Malwa and Rajputana.
Oil is extracted from these fruits only and the remaining oil cakes are used as manure.
The farm insects either soon get destroyed because of this manure or run away.
On an average of 10-20 tonnes of fruits are used.
Crops like potatoes etc. are benefited by the manure of this oilcake.
The oil cake of linseed is of two kinds.
on one side a tough part of linseed is attached and on the other it is separated.
The first one has less but the other one has more useful elements.
This oil cake has more of nitrogen part.
This oil cake is more nutritious than groundnut oil cake.
It has around 7% nitrogen.
The bad oil cakes are used as manure.
Otherwise they are more beneficial in feeding cattle than using them as manure.
There are several ways of providing green manure.
Crops such as san, wild neem,horse gram, antelope etc. are sown in farm and when they start flowering, they are tilled.
For green manure the sown crop is harvested and their heaps are kept and then a mixture of excreta and urine is put and then covered with 2 inches thick layer of soil.
It gets rotten and turns into manure within two weeks and then the manure is spread and allowed to cool.
This manure is spread in farms.
The leguminous plants like dhecha san, wild neem etc, sown in other farms are removed and planted during rainy season and they are mixed into the soil by tilling if they get rotten.
The crop sown in the farm are cut and planted and they are mixed into the soil if they get rotten.
Fish manure is not found at all the places.
A lot many fishes get washed away during floods and the dead remains of the fishes are seen at the river sides.
Majority of the fishes are dead among them.
The dead fishes are dried and powdered and they are put on to the roots of trees and covered with soil if required.
The production and quality of fruits increases due to fish manure.
The trees of mango, orange etc. bear sweet fruits if fish manure is put.
Fish manure is priceless for trees growing in orchards.
But religious Hindus would not like to kill any living being for any interest.
Bone manure is very useful.
But it is unfortunate that million tonnes of bones used for this purpose are sent abroad.
Small pieces of bones are put inside plant roots.
Nepalese put very small pieces of bones into the beds of fruit bearing trees and they say that the trees then give very sweet fruits.
Many agricultural scholars have known through their experience that bone manure makes fruits sweet, the number of fruits increase, they ripe early and the crop is saved from insects in the beginning.
But the tradition of putting bone pieces is not good.
Hence agricultural scholars prepare bone manure in three ways.
The first is bone powder( bone meal or rotten bone powder).
The second is burnt bone powder or bone ash(Bone black).
The third is bones boiled in acid which is also known as ` super phosphate of lime ` .
Professor Butni has written a significant volume named `` use of useless elements ` .
In this book he has described the value of elements that are washed in drains of all the major cities of the world.
It also has the description of Delhi.
He writes- The amount of nitrogen received from the dirty and useless elements flowing in the drains of this city with a population of 282000 is so much that it can give manure to a minimum of 10000 acre land and a maximum of 15000 acre land.
As per this estimation the usefulness of all the useless elements can be easily calculated and thinkers can imagine loss worth how many billions this country faces every year.
Lime is also an extremely significant manure.
Contemplating the literature of ancient Europe reveals that people of ancient Rome considered this manure essential for good yield.
It softens tough smooth soil and makes sandy and rocky land smooth.
It cleans the pores of soil and energizes the plants.
India leads the wheat producing countries of the world.
Except United states of America and Canada India produces highest wheat in the world.
During British ruled India , wheat was produced in 2 , 50 , 00000 acre land.
But the sad thing is that for the past 20 years in India there has been no sharp increase in wheat and significant difference in its production.
There has been amazing increase in the production of wheat in all the developed countries of the world due to scientific methods.
Countries like America , Canada , Australia produce thrice the amount of wheat that farmers of India produce in one acre.
The population of India is increasing rapidly and therefore its food problem is also getting more complex.
In such a situation it has become essential to increase the production of grains like wheat.
Further, wheat is being used more after world war.
It has increased the consumption of wheat in the country.
That is why several traders exporting goods to abroad say that very soon a time will come Indians will not only be insufficient in exporting their goods to abroad but they will also require to buy wheat for themselves from abroad.
Agricultural scholars say that if wheat is cultivated in India at large scale then its production can increase so much that it can very easily fulfill its requirement.
The reason for the lack of this product in India is that here agriculture is done using scientific methods.
Further the farmers have small farms here because of which farmers have to bear tenants expense and the production is also low.
Therefore the farmers here should cultivate on the basis of scientific methods using Chakbandi so that there is less expense and more production.
It has been seen that the places where farming is done using scientific methods has shown increased growth in production.
Farming was done using new scientific methods in shahjahanpur, as a result there was double increase in production.
Many experiments were done even in agricultural sector of Nagpur.
During 1883-84 an agricultural scholar named M. Fuler started exploring facts regarding manures used in wheat cultivation.
For the first two years there were some divine incidents because of which no results of their exploration was visible.
During 1885-86 there was lack of rainfall while sowing wheat and during December there were more rains than requirement and cool breeze also prevailed.
It led to wheat disease on the wheat crop of government farm.
It should be kept in mind that this disease was seen more on the places where artificial ammonium chloride manure was provided.
On the next year there was heavy rainfall during sowing and because of this the entire manure put in the farm got washed away.
Therefore no effect of that manure was seen.
Later experiments were carried on for several years.
From the last experiments done in Nagpur this thing is clear that nitrogen is an essential element for the farming of wheat.
Because of nitrogen manure they showed good results.
Because of combination of manure and irrigation there was more increase in the production of wheat.
On the wheat cultivation of Dumrao experimental area, Bihar, experiments with shora, sowdung and other manure were carried.
As a result of all these experiments, those manures put positive impact on the growth of crops which has more of nitrogen element.
With the combination of nitrogen manure and irrigation there was highest crop production.
Green manure gave good profit when there were good rains during sowing.
Amongst the spices, turmeric is Indian asset and it is known as the empress of spices because it is golden in color.
Turmeric provides attractive color to vegetables, pickle, sauce and other food items.
Pulses and vegetables look bad without turmeric.
India alone produces around 10 % of the total turmeric production of the world and in India turmeric is produced in Bihar, Orissa, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Kerela, Karnataka, Assam, Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh.
In Bihar turmeric is cultivated in Champaran, Muzzaffarpur, Khagadia, Begusarai, Vaishali and Patna while in Uttar Pradesh it is cultivated in districts of Devaria, Siddharth Nagar, Gonda, Barabanki, Bahraich, Pilibheet etc. but farmers grow indigenous varieties whose production is low.
Thus it takes the time period of two crops.
The rate of turmeric seeds is 20-25 tonnes per hectare which is very expensive.
If a farmer does not have its seeds then he has to spend more on seeds.
Rhizome, leaf spot and blurred disease of turmeric are quite harmful which reduces the productivity of turmeric.
It has a deep impact on the production of turmeric during sowing.
From the research carried in Rajendra agricultural University it has been found that turmeric should be sown between 15th May to 1st June.
For good production turmeric rhizome should be sown at a gap of 20 c.m and they should be 5 c.m deep.
The distance between rows should be of 30 c.m.
Covering:- Right after sowing the farm should be covered with green leaves of rosewood.
The green leaves should be put at the rate of 12-15 tonnes/hectare.
From the research carried in Rajendra agricultural University it has been found that there is 45 % increase in the production if it covered with green leaves of rosewood.
Crop grows after 30-35 days of sowing.
The pure income per hectare can be increased by growing two interval crops during the time of turmeric crop.
Paddy sapling should be grown in the farm after turmeric.
Sapling grows ready in 25-30 days, they should be plucked and sown at intervals.
It gets ready by December which should be plucked for green pods.
By adopting double cropping system you can get 20,000 Rs. per hectare pure income.
Three layered cultivation of turmeric , maize and pigeon pea have been quite profitable.
Raw turmeric is used only after processing.
While at some places in India, the raw turmeric is properly washed with clean water and dried in Sun for 10-15 days after cutting them into small pieces. They are stored in tins when they are completely dry. And from time to time they are used by soaking them in water and grinding on stone or making their powder.
But the turmeric prepared by this method has lack of yellow color and aroma that is why this method could not become much popular.
The most popular method of processing raw bales of turmeric is boiling them and polishing them which is as follows.
Right after boiling, the utensil should be removed from the flame and bales should be put out of the utensil and spread on clean surface and allowed to dry.
The bales should be spread in a thin layer and these bales should be collected and covered using carpet during evening so that no dew falls on them.
Turmeric bales dries and becomes ready in 10-15 days.
Properly dried bales are very tight and make a cracking sound on breaking.
Properly broken bales should not have more than 8% moisture then only they can be stored for longer duration.
Long back polishing work was done by tying sacks on hands or feet or tying a piece of sandal of bamboo baskets and rubbing them.
This method required hard work and less turmeric could be polished in more time.
Now this work is done using hand or electricity driven drums for polishing.
The drum that runs through hand has a handle, and when it runs the rubbing of small pins made inside drums does polishing.
In 1 hour, 1 kg of turmeric is polished using this method while the drum that runs through machine polishes 522 kg turmeric in 8 hours by two men.
Since ancient times Indians have been using turmeric in pulses, vegetables, sauces, pickles and other food items for giving golden color and special kind of aroma to food items.
Indian food items cannot be prepared without turmeric and if at all they are made they look bad without turmeric and the taste is also poor.
The scientists of national food institution, Hyderabad have proved that turmeric has anti cancerous values.
Thus those who take turmeric in their diet everyday do not get cancer.
Perhaps because of these qualities of turmeric Indians have been using it in food since primitive times.
Because of the presence of effective anti bacterial capacity of turmeric it kills germs present in human body and makes the body free of skin disease.
Turmeric powder when mixed with milk cream and applied on face removes dark patches from skin and the face shines.
On the auspicious occasion of marriage in north India turmeric powder is mixed with yellow mustard and gram flour and applied on entire body to cure skin disease and bring luster to the body.
Turmeric is an ancient cosmetic medicine.
Till today innumerable people use turmeric in the form of medicine and curing multiple diseases.
The tradition of putting turmeric in pulses, vegetables, kadhi, Pulao, fish, mutton in food is perhaps because Cancer does not occur if they are used.
Because of the blood purifying values present in turmeric, its use purifies blood.
Putting one or two drops of raw turmeric in eyes immediately gives relief.
The application of turmeric paste cures skin disease.
Eating the mixture of turmeric paste and honey cures diabetes.
Applying a little bit of turmeric with pure ghee before bath glows skin.
Applying thick paste of turmeric at the place of scorpion bite removes pain and sprinkling turmeric powder on leech bite immediately stops bleeding.
India grows around 10% of the total turmeric of the world.
In India turmeric is grown in 1,17,700 hectare land.
Which gives 3,47,800 tonnes of turmeric.
Every year India exports 1895 tonnes of turmeric to other countries of the world.
Which gives foreign exchange worth 46.3 billion rupees.
India has more than 60 % participation in international market which is a matter of pride.
When we talk of spice in food then chilly comes up in the mind.
There is hardly a person on this earth who has not tasted chilly.
Chilly is not only limited to taste, it is also used in medicines.
Further, chilly is a good source of vitamin-A and many salts and minerals.
Now the demand for chillies and other stuffs have increased in foreign markets and because of their export valuable foreign exchange is being received.
Since they have great demand, therefore it they are cultivated properly then the production and profit will be more.
It is the time to grow chilly.
Some people have already grown chillies and some will grow them soon. Let us talk something about chillies.
In Bihar it is grown as cash crop but the production is very less.
The main reason of low productivity is less use of developed varieties and technologies by the institution.
The second reason of more production is growth of healthy seeds.
Therefore high land whose soil is light loamy should be chosen for nursery.
For sowing chillies on one hectare of land 2.2-5 met long and 1-1.25 met wide around 25 beds are required.
Before sowing the seeds in beds, compost or rotten cowdung manure at the rate of 20-25 tonnes per hectare should be used.
Good farm beds are essential for sowing.
For this soil turning or 2-3 times indigenous tillers should be used and plank should be run to prepare the farm for sowing chillies.
One need not say that for chilly plantation the farm should be such where water does not stagnates and which has light loamy soil of good fertility.
During the first tilling of farm, application of rotten cow dung manure at the rate of 20-25 tonnes per hectare is required.
Weeding is required for 2-3 times for controlling the weeds in Kharif crop of chilly.
Light tilling between the rows after 3-4 weeks of sowing develops more roots which puts a positive impact on them.
As far as irrigation is concerned, it depends on the condition of soil and rains.
If there are no rainfall during the top dressing of urea and if the soil lacks moisture then a light irrigation should be definitely given.
If two caps of a medicine named planofix is solved in 10 litres of water and sprinkled at the time of flowering then it stops the falling of flowers and fruits.
Several medicines are made from the capsesin of red chilly which are used in cold, throat infection and chest problems.
There is a saying that `` red pepper is very useful but green pepper is more useful and black pepper is even better than them `` .
The capsesin of red chilly is used in making anti boils powder and ointment.
The powder made from Capsicum is used in colouring light coloured food items like kadhi, potatoes, eggs, paneer etc. and making them attractive.
Cumin occupies a special place in our food.
Its use has become essential in various vegetables and different kinds of tasty pickles, jelly and sauces everyday.
Further they are also used to make some medicines.
Its popularity can be estimated from the fact that it is used in both vegetarian and non vegetarian food items.
Though cumin can be grown in all kinds of soil but such land which has good drainage system and more water holding capacity so that there is less use irrigated water is considered for it.
Sandy loamy or loamy soil is best for its production.
Large lumps are made in smooth soil because of which there is difficulty in doing levelled sowing.
As far as possible the land should be levelled so that there is no difficulty in irrigation and every plant gets equal proportion of water.
fuzerium qumenai is a fatal disease of cumin.
Entire crop gets destroyed in heavy epidemic.
Hence farmers become debtor.
Hence in order to get rid off this disease it is essential not to sow cumin for 10-15 years in the farm that gets this disease because the seeds of that disease remain alive during this time and there is possibility of crops getting destroyed.
Because the cure of uktha disease is impossible therefore the sown seeds should e treated with a fungicide named bevastine.
The nitrogen requirement for cumin crops depends on availability of irrigated water.
If there is sufficient irrigated water then 100 k.g of nitrogen per hectare is good for its production.
But if there is lack of irrigated water then it is useless to give more than 60 k.g nitrogen per hectare.
Generally farmers fill the beds with more water than required so that there is no need to do frequent irrigation, because of this majority of the water percolates in the deep layers of land and plants are unable to utilize them.
The reason is that the cumin roots do not reach much deep thus in order to get more and more production from a certain amount of irrigated water it is essential to reduce the per irrigation water amount and the number of irrigation should be increased.
It is clear how much water or irrigation is required for how much nitrogen.
If the land is well prepared then not much weeds grow in this crop.
It is mostly seen that along with cumin seeds many kinds of weed seeds are also available.
Amongst them is , a weedicide seed named `` Jeeralu `` similar to cumin.
Thus while buying seed one should carefully see that the seed should be pure and free from weedicide seeds.
Despite these precautions if some weeds grow then they should be removed using khurpi.
Two kinds of insects harm cumin.
One is termite and the other is aphid which is also called chepa.
While preparing the farm for termite control,properly putting 10 % B.H.C powder at the rate of 25 k.g per hectare reduces the effect.
For controlling aphid, the spraying of 0.03 % motasistoks or rogar solution three- four times at an interval of every week or 10 days after 25 days of sowing saves the crop from aphid.
Sowa is a Rabi crop.
It has more power to resist extreme cold.
Dry weather during flowering is beneficial for good seed production.
Sowa crop in north India needs three irrigation.
But in South India it is grown as non irrigated crop.
It can be grown both in light and heavy land.
It gives good yield in less productive land.
The better time to grow sowa is between October to November.
But the time between 15 October-15 November is best for more production.
In fact Sowa is also sown using sprinkling method but they should be sown in rows at a distance of 30 c.m.
Ashes or sand should be definitely mixed with the seeds so that more seeds do not fall at a single place.
Sowa crop gets prepared for spices by the mid of March.
It is a 130-145 days crop.
The plants turn yellow when the crop becomes mature and the grains become light brown colored.
During this time the plants should be harvested and dried in a shady place for 8-10 days and then beaten to get seeds.
The seeds should be cleaned and properly dried and stored in sacks.
8-10 tonnes of seeds are obtained from one hectare of land.
Ginger occupies a significant place among spices.
It is called Adarak is Hindi, Ada in Assamese, Bangla and Odia, Adu in Gujarati, Shunti in Kannada, Ale in Marathi, Adrak in Punjabi, Aardrak in Sanskrit, Allam in Telugu, Adrak in Urdu, and Inzi in Tamil and Malayalam.
But in English it is called ginger and its botanical name is gingiber afisinel.
It is a member of gingiberesi plant family.
Ginger is used in spices, pickles, sauces, pulses, vegetables and other food items to make them tasty.
Dry ginger is a main part of Ayurvedic medicines and a domestic medicine also.
Further Soth is a infallible medicine of cattle.
In India ginger is cultivated mostly in the area of Kerela. As a result the production is also highest.
The other ginger producing states of India are- Meghalaya, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland, Assam, West Bengal, Orisssa, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Uttar Pradesh.
Ginger crop is grown from rhizomes.
The plant bears adequate roots within 3 months of sowing and the plants establish their contact with roots and start getting other nutritious elements.
Very less changes occur in the chemical values of sown rhizomes within 3 months of sowing.
If we take out the seeds rhizome after 3 months of sowing then again we get 70-75 % weight of the sown seed rhizome.
That is 12.6-14 tonnes of seed rhizomes are received from 18- 20 tonnes of sown seed rhizome.
This process should be completed by mid August.
Due to lack of ginger in market during August, very good price is obtained.
Warm humid climate is favorable for the cultivation of ginger.
Its cultivation is successfully carried in places with 1500 m height above sea level.
Regular and excess rainfall is essential for its production.
Irrigation is required on scarcity of rainfall.
Simple rainfall from sowing till sprouting and regular and excessive rainfall at the time of plants growth and favorable dry climate at the time of harvesting is good for its production.
Manures and fertilizers are required in large amounts for good production of ginger.
During last tilling, rotten cow dung manure or compost at the rate of 25-30 tonnes per hectare should be properly mixed in the soil.
If it is not available then 2-3 tonnes per hectare of powdered neem pomace should be put.
At the same time 375 k.g single super phosphate and 240 k.g muriate of potash should be mixed into the soil.
If the soil is attacked by termite then aldrin (5%) should be powdered and mixed in the soil at the rate of 25 k.g per hectare and plank should be run.
By the research done on ginger it has been proved that the seed rhizome of ginger should be taken only from such crop which was not infected by any disease in the last year.
For good production only the healthy seed rhizomes whose weight is between 18-20 grams and which has 3-4 buds should be chosen.
The seed rhizomes should be treated with 0.5 % egelol or 0.1 % senreson solution for 3 and 30 minutes respectively.
Doing this destroys the mycilium fungus that catches seed rhizomes and hence healthy plants grow.
Seeing the number and growth of weeds in ginger crop and 2-3 times of weed destroying is required.
The first destroying of weeds should be done by hands after 45 days of sowing.
The second and third destroying of weeds should be done using khurpi after 60 and 120 days of sowing respectively.
Mixed farming: Maize, pigeon gram and andi ` s mixed cultivation is done with ginger but the density of mixed crops should be kept very low.
Mixed cultivation yields less production as compared to pure cultivation.
Ginger wheat crop system : Ginger should be tilled by mid December and wheat should be planted in the farm.
Agaat Ginger gives good profit in the market but less yield is obtained.
Ginger should be definitely sown between 15 May - 31 May.
But where there is no irrigation facility it should be sown after first rains.
Seed rhizome of 18-20 gram which has four healthy buds should be used to get more yield.
The seed rhizomes should be treated with a solution of 0.1 % seresan for 30 minutes.
Weed control and tilling are essential to keep the farm weed free during October-November.
A solution of zinc or iron should be sprayed on the ginger plants if they lack them.
Irrigation is extremely important if there is lack of moisture in the farm because ginger rhizomes grow during this time.
The growth of rhizomes stops if the soil is tough.
February-March : The crop starts turning yellow during this time and those who wish to keep the nodules for seed rhizomes should till the crop field during March and clean all the roots on nodules and the nodules should be treated for half an hour in a solution of 0.3 % Ditho indofil M-45 and dried in shade.
When the solution applied in the rhizomes dries then they should be kept in a shady balcony or kept beneath the tree by spreading paddy straw and again they should be covered with straw and then mud paste should be applied.
The ginger pile thus kept for seeds should not be opened before the time.
The piles should be opened when one has to sow the seeds.
Nadiya: It is West Bengal ` s high yielding variety of ginger.
It is cultivated in almost all the ginger producing states of India.
The amount of dry elements in this variety of rhizomes is 20.2 %.
Nadia variety gives 240-250 tonnes per hectare produce.
This variety is used in making soth and arka.
Rio-de-geniro: It is Brazil ` s variety of ginger.
It has less amount of fibres.
The amount of dry ginger is 18.6 %.
This is the best variety for getting extracts.
It can be grown in various kinds of ginger growing regions.
5.12 % fibres are found in this variety.
They give 230 tonnes per hectare yield.
Chayna: It is a Chinese variety of ginger.
They have 21 % dry ginger.
180-190 tonnes per hectare of Chayna variety is obtained from dry ginger rhizomes.
Jorhat: This is a popular Assamese variety.
It is cultivated in Shiv sagar district and in the surrounding areas of Golaghat.
Their production capacity is 175-200 tonnes per hectare and they give 21.4 % soth.
To prepare soth from ginger, the tilling of the crop should be done after 240 days of sowing.
The leaves dries by this time.
While tilling one should be careful as to not cut the rhizomes.
The roots and the soil on the rhizomes should be properly cleaned and washed with water.
The rhizomes should be put inside clean water for 12 hours if required.
Further the thin cover above the rhizomes should be removed with the help of sharp knives made from bamboo.
Long rhizomes give good soth and their price is also good in the market.
Their amount of moisture is less than 10%.
In order to make the soth more shining they are rubbed inside bamboo basket which removes the remaining cover and soil particles.
This process of preparing soth is called unbleached method.
There is one more method of preparing soth which is called `` bleached method `` .
After removing the cover the rhizomes are immersed in 2 % lime solution for 6 hours.
Then the rhizomes are taken out and allowed to dry and after 15-20 days of drying they are rubbed in bamboo basket to make them shining.
The soth thus prepared is more white in colour.
Only healthy and certified rhizomes should be used for sowing or the rhizomes obtained from disease free regions should be sow.
After the completion of cultivation or tilling the remains of diseased plants should be collected and burnt.
The drainage system of the farm should be good so that water does not stands in the farm for much time.
Crop cycle should be adopted and farms should be cleaned.
The seeds should be treated with a solution of 0.1 % seresan for 3 minutes. It kills the hidden diseased fungi mycilium and healthy plants are prepared.
This disease is caused due to a fungus named coletotraikum gingiberi.
Initially small round or oval shaped light yellow patches appear on the leaves which later become brown in colour.
Later these patches increase and join each other.
The diseased part generally dries and falls down. This makes small pores in the leaves.
Entire leaves die when the intensity of disease increases.
Such leaves curl which are affected by the disease in the upper portion of the leaves..
Small black fungal dots on old patches increase.
The impact of the disease is more on humid high temperature climate.
This disease is caused due to a fungus named failostika gingiberi.
Small, colorless, oval or long patches appear on the leaves in this disease.
Later the size of patches increase and turn yellow in color and the edges become dark brown.
The outer portion of the patches are yellow in color.
When several patches come together and take the form of a bigger patch.
An increase in the number of black colored fungal dots on these patches is seen.
Piriculeria leaf patch: This disease is caused due to a fungus named piriculeria gingiberi.
The disease appears on the leaves in the form of oval or long patches.
The patches are red brown to brown in color.
The middle portion of old patches are grey and corners are dark brown in color.
The patches increase in size and join each other.
The middle part dries and falls down and a small pore is built in between.
Scorching of leaves: This disease is caused due to a fungus named rhiziktonia batatikola.
Irregular small size light brown patches appear on the leaves which later increase in size and spread on the entire leaves.
Diseased leaves become loose and either turn down or fall down.
Leaves turn white or light in color when the intensity of the disease increases.
There is an increase of a pin size black colored fungus at the diseased place which is known as `` scleroshium `` .
Yellow disease: This disease is caused due to a fungus named fugerium oxysporum, a sub variety of gingiberi.
The lower most leaves of the plant turn yellow in this disease.
The yellowing starts from the corners and gradually entire leaves turn yellow.
The diseased plants dies by drying but do not fall on ground.
The stem portion near the ground level is soft and watery.
Such plants easily come up on plucking.
The inner portion of diseased rhizomes are brown in color.
Roots start rotting.
The growth of rhizomes decreases.
Drying disease: This disease is caused more at the time of storing or during the maturing of ginger crop.
The inner portion of the rhizomes turn black in color because of this disease.
The diseased tissue turns into black powder.
This is actually a fungal growth.
The rhizomes shrink and fall when the disease is intense.
Such symptoms are caused due a fungus named diplodia netaelensis.
Another kind of drying disease is caused due to a fungus named maikofomia kaijiaulina.
The impact of this disease is seen more during the maturing of crops in farms.
The leaves of diseased leaves plants turn yellow.
Later the entire plant looks burnt.
Diseased rhizomes shrink and become dry.
Bacterial disease: This disease spreads due to a bacteria named psuedomonas solenesiarum.
The main symptoms of this disease are yellowing, loosing and drying of leaves.
Initially the lower leaves become dry and gradually the sequence of drying increases towards upper side.
The diseased leaves curl.
The stem portion near the ground level becomes watery and easily separates from the rhizome on plucking when the disease is intense.
The inner portion of diseased plant becomes livid or black in color.
Termite: It consists of insects of microterms and odontoterms species,
They are white or off white or dark brown in color with a touch of cream color.
The termites hidden in soil cover make under passes beneath and eat plant roots.
They cut the plant roots and stems in such a way as if they are cut with a sharp knife.
They begin their attack from sowing and they harm all the stages of crop.
The stem disease of ginger : The scientific name of this insect is dichocrosis puntifirelis.
The adult insects are medium sized butterfly which are white and yellow in color.
The harmful stage of this incest is the baby which is called caterpillar.
The baby enters the plant stem and reaches the rhizome by making an underpass beneath.
It eats the new buds.
Consequently symptoms start appearing, buds shrink and later become dry.
This insect affects more during July-August.
Rhizome magot: The scientific name of this insect is chelseadomia stikarnis.
The adult insects are very small in size and they only have a pair of front wings.
The harmful stage of this insect is also the baby which is called magot.
Magot is without wings,fleshy and off white in color.
It enters the rhizomes and eats the soft tissues. Consequently the rhizomes dries and when they increase in number the entire plant dries.
This insect attacks more during the month of October-November.
Leaf roller: The scientific name of this insect is udusthpus folus.
The adult insects are medium size black colored butterfly.
There are 8 wings patches in both the front wings and there is a big patch on the back wings.
The baby which is called caterpillar is light green in color and it is the harmful stage.
The baby curls the ginger leaves and stays inside eat and eats the inner leaf.
It attacks from August till October.
The healthy and tasty eatables of ginger: Ginger has a different significance amongst the tasty and spicy spices that nature has given us.
It is an extremely significant spice crop whose underground nodes have been used since ancient times.
The nodes of this spice crop are called rhizomes.
The fresh and raw rhizomes are called ginger and the dry rhizomes are called soth.
Both ginger and soth are home medicines for several diseases.
Generally several kinds of Ayurvedic medicines are made from Soth.
Apart from Humans soth is an ultimate medicine for several cattle diseases.
Method of preparation: Firstly properly wash ginger in clean water.
The cover of washed nodes should be peeled and finely chopped.
These pieces and the above mentioned ingredients should be properly mixed and filled in clean glass jar a wide mouth.
The mouth of the jar should be properly tied with a clean cloth.
This jar should be exposed in sun for 8-10 days everyday.
Meanwhile the sauce should be properly mixed from top to bottom so that all the ingredients are cooked.
The tasty and healthy ginger sauce is ready.
This sauce curbs cold, cough and fever and is very beneficial for children.
Soak ginger in clean water for two days.
On the third day take then out of water and prick them with steel forks and then again wash them with clean water.
Now boil these nodules in water at low flame and then take them out and dry them.
Further prepare a thin wire sugar syrup with 2 kgs of sugar and add ginger nodules into them and stir until they are cooked.
When the syrup becomes thick like honey and ginger nodules are properly cooked then take them out of flame and add green cardamom powder and rose water.
Fill the Jam into jars when they are totally cool.
This jam is tasty to eat.
Industrial body ASSOCHAM estimates that there will great opportunities for jobs in the industries based on information & technology, banking and agriculture in the country.
In a study report by ASSOCHAM it has been expected that the new year will be good for IT and IT service providers with the reform in American economy and downfall in rupee.
Similarly the scope of Rabi crop will support agriculture based tractors and demands and jobs in industries like manure, seeds and agricultural equipments.
According to the report with the reform in economic growth, the problems of blocked loans will be reduced and the government banks will accelerate the recruitment of vacant posts.
The modern methods of selective breeding and animal rearing such as dense pig cultivation(such kinds of practices are implemented at hens also)has increased the growth of flesh production.
With this issues related to chemicals used in the industrial production pertaining to the health impact of antibiotic medicines, growth hormones and flesh have come up.
