Sitting on a branch , the bird was looking at its empty nest .
There was irritation on its face and its this irritation was resulting in its tone .
The bird and its kids were not in the nest .
Munna also looked up twice , the nest was really empty .
The leaves were falling from the trees - plants , he was trying to escape them moving his head here and there and his sleep got disturbed .
Munna recalled that yesterday night he had dozed off listening to a story from grandmother .
What happened in the story further , that he could not know .
Probably , grandmother did not tell the story seeing him asleep or else grandmother went to sleep herself because mom was saying that older people get tired sooner .
Also , she keeps doing something or the other the whole day .
Now a days his grandmother had come to be with him for some days .
Doesn ` t matter , today I will sleep after listening to the story , Munna said to himself .
After breakfast itself he went up to grandmom and started insisting to tell yesterday ` s story .
Grandmom explained that stories are told in the night .
A man forgets the way listening to stories in the day .
He insisted again `` No , I want to hear . the same yesterday ` s story .
`` That I told you `` .
I don ` t know all that .
I slept off , I just want to hear the story .
You tell that the story concludes in the dream in the night but I did not listen or see the complete story in the dream .
Alright , you can listen to the story in the night , I will tell it again .
The thing was decided and Munna kept waiting all day for night so that he can listen to the story from Grandmom .
It was night and when everyone had had dinner then Munna got into grandmom ` s bed again .
According to him now it was time to sleep and he had to listen to yesterday ` s story from grandmom .
He asked grandmom to tell the story again .
Grandmom asked him - `` Ok tell me till where did you listen the story . .
`` You tell from the beginning . .
Ok fine .
Grandmom warned him before starting the story `` but do not sleep like yesterday `` .
`` I will not sleep at all , you just keep telling the story . .
`` Ok listen then `` there was a male bird and a female bird .
Both had made their nest on a trees ` branch .
They had two kids .
They kept their names Chi-Chi and Chun-Chun .
One day the female bird got a lot of grains of rice from somewhere and the male bird got grains of pulses .
Both thought lets cook something today .
It was the last day of the week , meaning Saturday .
The male bird and the female bird wanted to make Khichdi but kids wanted that Pulav should be made .
The male bird and the female bird decided to make Pulav itself .
`` Did you go to sleep ? `` Grandmom asked in the middle ; `` No Grandmom `` .
`` So listen further `` seeing that Munna is not asleep , grandmom proceeded the story .
A huge pot was placed .
Munna enthusiastically excused in the middle and wanted to know that the stomach of the birds is small then why a big p ?
Grandmom explained that the biggest among the containers of the dolls .
The male bird also kept contributing and both of them together made pulav .
Pulav was made very delicious .
The male bird plucked leaves from the tree and instantly made plates with the leaves .
The sitting arrangement was made laying down branches and big leaves on two branches .
All enjoyed the pulav to the fullest and went to their respective beds to relax .
Everybody fell asleep .
I was just getting evening when Chi-Chi ` s sleep broke , her stomach was aching .
Right then Chu-Chu got up too and started getting nauseated .
The bird started nursing them , ruckus started in the house due to kids crying .
What should be done , who to call .
Which doctor , which medical practitioner to search for .
The male bird was not able to understand .
He got out worried , and then itself Munna questioned , ` Grandmom , you didn ` t tell why the bird was sullen `` .
He recalled the thing from his dream which he saw this morning in which the male bird was watching his nest irritated and sullen .
Now when you listen to the whole story , then only you will know .
And how long is the sto ?
Not much , you just be quiet and listen .
Ok , now I will be quiet .
When the bird came out , he met the crow who stayed in the same tree .
Those days crows were good doctors and they had good knowledge of medicines , but crows are cunning and devious too .
That crow was like this too .
With his shrewdness and cunningness , fooling other birds he sometimes would eat their eggs and sometimes their kids .
The bird used to be aware of him but right now he wanted medicine for his kids .
Have you heard that sayi ?
Munna nodded his head without understanding anything and the story proceeded further .
The male bird told the crow everything and the crow quickly prepared and gave a packet and also said that for precautions sake the bird also should take the medicine so that her health does not deteriorates .
The bird made both the kids eat the medicine and both ate themselves too .
There was some improvement in the children ` s health and they slept off , it was almost evening .
Chun-Chun , Chi-Chi , the male bird and the female bird also slept off .
You know the evil crow had also mixed a sedative in the packet of medicine .
He stole both the kids .
The bird looked for the kids everywhere in the morning but they could not be found .
He returned disappointed and started sulking sitting on a branch near the nest .
Disappointed the female bird also went off saying let me also look around once , maybe I get them .
I made them sleep here only .
And what do we learn from this story .
I did tell that the diabolical and the foe are never to be trusted .
Is there ever such a story .
Then you only tell .
Munna said that that is not the thing .
Is a crow ever a doct ?
There is never friendship between a bird and a crow .
The thing was that the children had grown up and had gone really far away , so they were sad .
Grandmom took a deep breath .
He reached for the examinations to get the job .
It was still two hours remaining .
There was an old banyan tree standing close by .
He started relaxing sitting in the shade of the Banyan tree .
When the result of the examination came he was successful and he got the job also .
After that coincidentally his appointment was in the area of that Banyan tree itself .
He also got the responsibility of the Survey to widen the road .
He marked the old Banyan .
A few days later when that banyan tree was being hit , he was explaining his ability to the minister .
Reading books is one thing and to encounter their soul is an entirely different thing .
For his this sharp eye only , there is a substantial fan section of the book reviews of the journalist - author Anant Vijay .
Although in words there is percent difference but when the crises of not reading is globally settling in , he through his book reviews , reaches not as a well but as an elixir pot to the thirsty .
His specialty is also that he by reviewing the english books of native - foreign authors , establish the bridge of literary possibilities in between the plain of two languages .
Vidhao ka Vinyaas published by Vaani publications is a golden opportunity to understand the art of book reviewing .
Actually , the soul of 46 books read and analyzed by the author is consolidated in this book .
Due to his natural interest the largest number among these is of biographies but there is also sufficient amount of representation of novels and ideological books in it .
It is probably the effect of Anant Vijay ` s journalistic background only that he keeps finding the hidden too with the printed and his this innate curiosity makes these reviews sometimes very stern and sometimes very poignant .
The way Anant Vijay adeptly expose the tactics of selling books under market pressure -LRB- Unlikely Hero Om Puri - Nandita Puri , Five Point Someone - Chetan Bhagat -RRB- , in the same forthright manner do not hesitate to highlight autobiography in the guise of autobiography -LRB- Keeping the Faith - Somnath Chatterjee -RRB- .
This book which measures the creativity of the Indian english literature along with the amount of popular literature served in the market , is equally important to the general readers and students of journalism and literature .
Two days back , an Istgasa has been filed in the court of Chief Metropolitan Magistrate , Jaipur against Irfan Khan who won the National Award for his film Paan Singh Tomar , with the allegation of smoking in a public place .
The next hearing of the case will be on 21st March .
The complainant Anand Singh Rathore says that he had come to pick up a friend of his on seven march at the Sanganer Airport of Jaipur .
During this time film actor Irfan Khan was publically smoking cigarette in a smoking prohibited area .
Its complaint was made to the Airport officials , but they did not pay attention and did not even provide the CCTV footage .
The complainant says that cine-stars are the ideals of children and if they themselves will smoke cigarette openly like this then it will have an adverse effect on them .
The security guards search every person before entering the airport and keep them out on finding cigarettes etc , due to being a celebrity he was not searched and was allowed to take the cigarette inside .
The Lucknow government has revised the state ` s film-making policy .
Now instead of Rs 1 crore 40 lakh would be funded for a film made in the local language .
For taking the funding for Hindi films , at least 75 per cent of the shooting of the film will have to be done in Uttar Pradesh .
The decree to revise the policy has been declared .
Instead of Rs 50 lakh , Rs 1.25 crore will be given to the director selected for the award on making the second film in the same year .
Similarly , in a fiscal year , the maximum grant has been increased to Rs 5 crore .
Under the revised policy the chartered accountants in the grant providing selection committee , who has the experience of audit exams of the audit of film production , they are also included as a member .
This amendment has been made to assess the practical construction costs .
You must have heard and seen a lot about the world of theater till now .
But do you know about Moscow ` s ` Cat Theater ` .
This theater is starting after a very long time once again .
You must have seen the specimens of art many a times in the theater .
But Moscow ` s ` Cat Theater is completely different from ordinary theaters .
Cats are the main characters in this acting school .
You must have seen acts like from galloping on the back of the joker to dancing on the beats of the ball and showing acrobatics on revolving logs or walking on the rope .
In Russia , when cats do all these acts then people are forced to bite their nails in amazement .
These amazing cats of the ` Cat Theatre ` clearly know which stunt is to be done when , looking at which the audience roll in laughter .
A total of 120 cats were included in the fleet of ` Moscow Cat Theatre ` .
All these are masters in their art .
These cats are known for their acting and mad acts .
This exciting performance by cats is known by many names .
` Cat nappers ` , ` Cat Clowns ` and ` Cat from the Universe ` , are few such names .
The introduction of this Russian theater was done together by famous animal trainer Yuri Kuklachev and his son Damitri in 1990 .
When these cats started walking on the ropes , showing acts on jumping horses and posing standing on the mirror ball , then people from distant places started coming to see the ` Cat Theatre ` .
Due to many reasons the ` Cat Theatre ` was closed for some time .
Now , once again the theater began in a new way , crowds of people flocked to see the performance of the cats .
Although a few Animal Rights Groups are not considering this treatment to animals as correct and are protesting against it .
But according to the art director of ` Cat Theatre ` Damitri Kuklachev ` the atmosphere of the theater is such that the animals do not have any problems working here and they feel very good ` .
He tells that we have 100 cats but they are not brought together and they are given training .
According to Damitri , today an entire world of cats has settled here .
Damitri ` s father Yuri Kuklachev claims that it is the world ` s only Cat Theater .
Yuri can also be seen teaching the stunt and music to the cats on the stage .
The audience can see these cats before and after the show in the Glass Cat Temple of the theater .
Film star Sunny Leone is very happy becoming the part of Bollywood .
Recently during an event Sunny expressed her experience of joining Bollywood .
Entering the Indian Entertainment Industry through the TV reality show Bigg Boss , Sunny made the start of her career with Pooja Bhatt ` s film ` Jism 2 ` .
Now she will be seen in Ekta Kapoor ` s home production film ` Ragini MMS 2 ` .
Besides this , she is also doing a small role and an item song ` Laila ` in ` Shootout at Wadala ` .
Leone says , for me working in this industry is like a dream come true .
I am totally new here and I am happy that people are accepting me .
It is said that success also brings the new ways to live life along with it .
Something similar is happening with actor Imran Hashmi .
He has not only started being careful in choosing his films , but soon he will open his production house too .
Trapped concerning his film Ghanchakkar , Imran organised a lunch party recently , in which alongside him his co-star in the film Vidya Balan became the host .
Where Vidya was actively talking to everyone in this party , Imran was standing in a corner in absolute Ghanchakker style .
When we asked Imran about this quietness , he said that this itself is the demand of his character .
The director has given clear instructions that he should not tell anything to the media about the character and himself .
When the media will not know anything then paying attention to the rumors they will themselves make news .
Now say who will not be happy by Imran ` s this promptness with words .
After this when he was sought for information about the production house he said that the time has not come yet , but he has a heartfelt desire to open a production house .
On the lines of every big actor he would like to work on the stories he has faith in .
By the way Imran ` s this comment is absolutely like top-quality actors .
Where he wants to keep the curiosity alive about his film , he does not want to give any hint about his production house .
As if he does not want to tell anything to the media .
This is what is called taking benefit from everything .
In ` Aisha ` Sonam Kapoor played the role of a fashion conscious girl , and in ` Delhi 6 ` and ` Mausam ` , she appeared in the character of a simple girl .
In ` Ranjhanna ` once again her look is different .
Sonam says , I never weigh my life in the weighing scales of success .
I never got typecast working in the Industry .
This is my biggest achievement .
I want to different roles .
I do not want to get limited in an image hence I never accepted the roles that would typecast me .
Sonam disagrees with the reports of Sonakshi Sinha ` s name being considered for ` Ranjhana ` earlier .
She says , ` There are many films that I declined , but I never discussed that thing ` .
The reason for this is that I respect my fellow actors , producers and directors and I can say it confidently that I always was the first choice for the role of Joya in ` Ranjhana ` .
The title of the next film of Sushant Singh Rajput who got popular with `` Kai Po Che `` has been declared .
The name of this film coming with Pariniti Chopra has been kept ` Sudh Desi Romance ` .
A local type of romance will be seen in this presentation of the director of ` Band Baja Baraat ` Manish Sharma and the writer of ` Chak De ` Jaideep Sahani .
It is not clear where the shooting of the film will take place and what is the setting .
It is being said that Manish Sharma is going to Jaipur .
` Sudh Desi Romance ` will be the debut film of actress Vani Kapoor .
The poster which has come as the first look of the film has the local flavor .
It seems that this love triangle will touch the problems of romance and sex of the lovers of small towns in a local style .
In the last few films , the stories of different areas of the country have been seen in Yash Raj films .
Once famous for romance in Switzerland , Yash Raj films has declared and is now depicting ` Sudh Desi Romance ` .
Last week two small films came .
Based on budget stars and presentation , both these relatively small films did not get sufficient audience .
Mrigdeep Singh Lamba ` s ` Fukray ` did a little better collection .
The film got a collection of over 2.5 million on Friday , which grew more than 4 million on Sunday .
The opening of the film was low only , hence despite the increase the collection was mild .
Weekend collection could only reach close to 10 crore .
Tatar Suhail ` s ` Ankur Arora Murder Case ` became the victim of its severity .
There was no star attraction in the film .
Its weekend collection was a little over 1 crore .
On the other hand ` Yeh Jawani hai Diwani ` crossed the number of 168 crores collecting a little over 15 crores in its third week .
In the history of Cannes Film Festival , for the first time the highest award , ` Palme D ` Or ` was awarded to a film based on lesbian love relationships ` Blue is the Warmest Color ` .
The announcement of the awards was done at the conclusion of the 66th Cannes Film Festival .
The nine-member jury headed by Hollywood director Steven Spielberg appreciated the film ` s Tunisian director of the French origin Abdellatif Kechiche and its two young actresses Adèle Exarchopoulos and Léa Seydoux .
Jury members included Indian actress Vidya Balan .
In the three-hour film ` Blue Is The Warmest Colour ` Adel has played a 15-year-old girl who falls in love with an older woman .
This character has been played by Lee .
There were 20 films in the awards race at Cannes this year .
Filmmaker Con Brothers film Inside Levin Davis got the second highest award Grand P .
This film is based on the folk music in New York in the seventh decade of the last century .
One another American Bruce Dern got the Best Actor award for the film Nebraska and for Farhadi ` s film The Past Bérénice Bejo got the best actress award .
Bejo was quite appreciated for the Oscar-winning film `` The Artist `` .
The third highest award of Cannes ` The Jury Award ` was awarded to the Japanese film-maker Hirokazu Kore-eda for his film ` Like Father Like Sun ` .
It is the story of two families who discover later that their six year old child was switched at birth .
Amat Escalante got the best director award for the film Heli based on the violence taking place in Mexico for drugs .
China ` s Jia Zhangke got the Best Screenplay Award for the film A touch of Sin based on the investigation on corruption in his country .
Fond of trekking on mountains from childhood , young IITian Kashyap Rawal got so obsessed with cycling that he quit his job in a corporate company in Bangalore and embarked on an all India tour on February 16 .
During this time he informed the people on the efforts taking place in various states to save the environment .
He will reach his home Kota from Delhi on Monday completing a challenging journey of about 12 thousand kilometers with a bicycle .
His father Naresh Chandra Rawal is a colonel in the army and mother is a housewife .
After completing MSc -LRB- Maths -RRB- from IIT Kanpur he worked on the position of a business analyst in Genpact software company , Bangalore for two years .
He used to ride bicycle only for 12 kilometers everyday for commuting to the office .
He traveled alone on the inaccessible and icy roads of 10 states including Kanyakumari , Kerala , Karnataka , Jammu - Kashmir , Himachal Pradesh and Punjab for the Save the Earth mission .
Kashyap also did a course in Mountaineering while studying in IIT .
During the travel in the plains he cycled for approximately 150 kms in one day .
He had to face adverse weather conditions in different states .
He had to travel through scorching heat , rain and snowy roads .
He brought the efforts taking place to save the environment in different states to the people through Facebook .
Kashyap told over the phone that while interacting with people in the southern states , he learned some languages like Malayalam .
He has traveled to many mountainous areas with the bicycle till now .
With the name itself it can be guessed that this film has been made considering the box office .
The heroics of a police inspector in the frenzy of clash between two Gujjar gangs .
A long Starcast and a wide variety of spicy stuff .
But there is nothing in the film Zila Ghaziabad that a controversy would spark off .
Some names like Fauji Satbir Gujjar and Pritam Singh present in the movie definitely do give this idea that this a film made on a real story , but this is not true .
The truth infact is that Zila Ghaziabad is an image of last few hit and popular gangster movies .
The film can also be called as the cocktail of Omkara , Dabangg , Singham and Rowdy Rathore without any hesitation .
Overall , except the title the film has no connection to Ghaziabad in any matter .
Barring a few scenes , most of its shooting has happened in Maharashtra ` s Wai city .
Zila Ghaziabad is the story of the clash between two Gujjar gangs .
One gang is Fauji and the second is of Masterji aka Satbir Gujjar .
When the fights between these two gangs becomes a problem for ordinary residents of the district , then there is the entry of the idiosyncratic type of inspector Pritam Singh .
Pritam Singh diplomatically eliminates both the gangs and wins the applaud of the department and the general public with his boldness .
Needless to say that there is enough place for gunplay in the film but also has space for item songs .
Since it is a film of that category which is seen leaving the mind at home , it does not leave any adverse effect on the image of the Police and neither disgraces the Ghaziabad district .
If we talk about the director , the work of Anand Kumar is average .
There is no seriousness in the acting of the actors .
Actor Sanjay Dutt and Arshad Warsi have tried to create a new image as an actor .
Vivek Oberoi , Chandrachur Singh , Ravi Kishan , Paresh Rawal , Ashutosh Rana , Divya Dutta and Minissha Lamba are fit in their own roles .
Be it the idols of Mumbai ` s Elephanta or Lord Buddha ` s statue at Sarnath , watching this puranic heritage on the canvas decorated in colors produces a joyful experience .
In the beautiful pictures made of a mixture of oil paints you will get a chance to see many sculptures like the Shiva and Parvati of Khajuraho .
Which has been put on canvas by painter Salan Murgod using various bright colors .
In a painting exhibition named ` Past Into Present ` in Azad Bhavan , looking at the lively paintings it feels as if they will just start speaking .
Besides these special paintings in this exhibition , the painting of the dancing idol which was found in the excavation in Mohenjodaro was liked a lot by the art lovers .
People liked a Nandi bull ` s picture among Natarajan and Karnataka ` s mythological statues .
There is also a picture of Lord Buddha in the exhibition , in which different expressions of his face have been taken in the sculptures , also there are some artefacts included in these .
The painter has painted Lord Vishnu ` s pictures with Garud along with Ashoka pillar .
This unique painting exhibition will continue till May 29 .
Actually who is responsible behind the persistent rise in crimes concerning women .
Administration , police , law , society or the government .
It has not been possible to reach a conclusion on these questions till now , but when the young artists presented these questions in the form of satire and humor , the audience was seen trying to figure out reality behind this .
The audience during the staging of the comic play ` Janta Darbaar ` in Muktadhara auditorium especially tried to understand .
Rajiv Sinha directed this play during the annual event Muskurahat 2013 organized by an NGOs .
It has been shown in the play that when a poor beggar is made the counselor , then a woman who has come to the hearing asks for help for the molestation happened to her .
During the hearing the parents are called and asked the question that who is responsible for this who blame the society .
The protectors of the society tell the administration to be responsible .
There administration to the legislation and the legislation to the government .
Similarly , in the end the government attempts to manipulate the law according to their own convenience by the government was also presented through the medium of satirical dialogues .
The main artists of the play Rishu Sinha , Sanjiv Malik , Swapnil Raj Gaurav and Vidya Viswanathan impressed with their acting .
The 30th Bharatendu theater festival organised by Art , Culture and Language Department of Delhi Government in collaboration with Sahitya Kala Parishad started on Monday in Shri Ram Art Center .
The story of Laila Majnu that has become the symbol of failed love was staged on the first day of the festival .
Many topnotch plays will be staged under the direction of many legendary directors for a week in this event going on till March 25 .
NSD graduate Anil Choudhary has directed the play ` Laila Majnu ` written by Nathram Gaud .
This amazing story of love has been presented in an interesting and efficient manner in Nautanki style .
Watching which melted the hearts of the audiences and the play was well liked .
The chairperson of NSD , Aman Aana inaugurated the festival .
In this eight-day theater festival besides prestigious directors like Salim Raza , Sohela Kapoor , Bapi Bose , the plays on several topics of various veterans will also be staged .
The play based on Bhagwati Charan Verma ` s Chandralekha made with the same name will also be staged at this festival .
Surendra Sharma has done its direction .
Kissa Maujpur ka directed by Chitra Singh will also be staged .
The play ` Ek Kutte ki kahani ` based on Sadat Hassan Manto ` s biography and his character will be staged on Monday under the direction of Salim Raza .
The author of this play is Danish Iqbal .
The movie made on the story of Paan Singh Tomar who after achieving national-international fame as a national runner became a Chambal dacoit because of circumstances has received top honors at the 60th National Film Awards .
Directed by Tigmanshu Dhulia ` s Paan Singh Tomar was honored the best feature film award and or his fine acting Irfan Khan was awarded the best actor award for the same film .
Along with Irfan , Marathi actor Vikram Gokhale was also awarded the the Best Actor Award for Marathi film Anumati . .
Marathi actress Usha Jadhav was awarded the Best Actress Award for acting in the Marathi film Dhag .
The National feature film jury headed by veteran filmmaker Basu Chatterjee selected 38 films in 14 languages for various awards , in which many major awards went to Hindi and Marathi films .
The important award for best direction has been given to Shivaji Patil , also for Dhag .
Although , in the 60th National Film Awards Hindi films remained the favorites .
For wholesome entertainment 2012 ` S much-mentioned and popular movie Vicky Donor got the award for best popular entertainment , for the director ` s debut film the Indira Gandhi Award was given to Bedabrata Pain ` s Chittagong .
The award for the Best Children ` s Movie also to hindi movie Dekh Indian Circus and for the same film child actor Virendra Pratap has been decided to get Best Child Actor Award .
It has been decided to give away the award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role to Anu Kapoor and Best Actor in a Supporting Role to Dolly Ahluwalia , also for Vicky Donor .
Pandit Birju Maharaj will also receive the award from the president on May 3 .
He has been given this award for the choreography of a song in Kamal Haasan ` s movie Vishwarupm .
The jury also deemed a special mention of Priyanka Chopra ` s sister Parineeti Chopra for acting in her first film Ishaqzaade .
The award for Best Singer Male was given to Shankar Mahadevan for the Hindi film ` Chittagong ` and Best Singer Female to Arati Ankalikar-Tikekar for Marathi film Sanhita .
Some big films of 2012 did not get the big awards .
Kahani had to get contented with Best Original Screenplay Story -LRB- Sujoy Ghosh -RRB- and best editing -LRB- Namrata Rao -RRB- , another popular film ` Oh My God ` based on a Gujarati play with best adapted screenplay -LRB- Bhavesh Mondalia , Umesh Shukla -RRB- Award .
Anurag Kashyap ` s acclaimed film ` Gangs of Wassepur ` had to get satisfied with only one technical award for re-recording .
The look of Mahadev Auditorium ` s Prithvi Theat ?
Unlike Param , the National Film awards jury instead of handing over the recommendations of the awards to the Information and Broadcasting Minister kept it infront of the media .
This was done on the advice of Information-Broadcasting Minister Manish Tewari who believes that the jury has worked impartially so the names of the winners should be made public first .
Concerning a suggestion of providing good platforms for presenting documentary films , Manish Tewari said to the jury members that their Ministry can give Delhi ` s Government Mahadev Auditorium a form like the Prithvi Theatre in Mumbai .
The award for Best Non - Feature film was given to Raja Shabir Khan ` s ` Shepherds of Paradise ` , whereas the best book on cinema award was given to BD Garg ` s ` Silent Cinema of India : A Pictorial Journey ` .
The famous filmmaker Ram Gopal Varma ` s film ` The Attacks Of 26 ` made on the Mumbai terror attacks is in trouble due to some sensitive scenes .
The government and the security and intelligence agencies has objection to some scenes of this film which is based on the real story of the biggest terror attack on India .
The Home Ministry has asked the Central Censor Board to watch the film again and review some of the scenes .
Verma who has been associated with controversies after the 26 attacks will have to cut some scenes from his film after objections from the government .
According to highly placed sources , the Home Ministry has written a letter to the Board .
It has been said in this that the responsibility of internal security is of the Home Ministry .
Hence it should be kept under confidence regarding ` The Attacks Of 26 ` .
The Ministry has told the Censor Board to amend certain dialogues and scenes along with a list of objections .
According to sources , the Intelligence Department had warned the government that in the film the state and the central government have been shown in shock and confusion during the attack .
In the film the government and security agencies have been shown delaying and wavering in taking a decision during the bloody battle with the Pakistani terrorists for three days in the Taj hotel .
Nana Patekar was in the role of the lead police officer in the film .
In the games of benefits , there are only a few people familiarizing people with the true voice of the common man .
The famous satirist and well - known journalist Anuj Khare ` s name can be counted in the chosen few .
After ` Chillar Cintan ` this is Khare ` s second satire collection .
Khare himself believes that if no leaf moves , does not stir inside someone , no flowers bloom , no system change , no game exists , then what is the use of writi ?
The secret of the benefit is seen in the sharpness of his satire .
The author has an opinion that if there are no risks , life becomes colorless .
Hence without bothering about praise or criticism , he picked up the pen .
Either taking the news of the routine revolutionaries or watching the prospects of the revolution on the verge of a meltdown , picking up the coffin of Tunde ideas or ` praising ` the people standing on the books to raise or grow their stature , Anuj has been successful .
He has also found the latest version of criticism and has also aimed sympathy management , he managed to get hold of the problem of love , also wrote direct letters to the wife visiting her place .
There is jolliness and vigilant concentration in his language , which catches the hidden meaning of the word spoken .
After a gap of nearly 20 years , it is surprising for an author for the creative work to come back .
But because of this reason the new poetry collection ` Pahad Sirsak hai Prithvi ke ` of an author like Raja Khugshal certainly can not ignore .
This is Raja Khugsal ` s third poetry collection after ` Samvaad ke Silsile ` in 1983 and ` Sadi ke Sesh Varsh ` in 1991 .
From time , society , culture , system to the reflection on environment is seen in his poetry .
So it would not be wrong to say that the Raja Khugshal has kept the poet within him alive amid his stoicism and aloofness .
Despite a long time , the poet inside him did not let his time and society get lost by the poems .
There are many shades of Raja Khugshal ` s poems .
Sometimes he expresses the changing faces in the poem ` Duniya ka Chehra ` , and sometimes he says the story of a culture in the poem ` Bhotia ` .
` Meel ka Pathar ` is a small poem , but its meaning is huge .
He considers Mil ka Pathar as ` a guide and a companion ` .
Similarly , the language of ` Anant mein Maun ` -LRB- dedicated to respected Shamsherji -RRB- is intuitive and simple , but is not devoid of poetry .
Whatever he felt , he in simple words gave it a form of poetry with respect and dignity .
If words are a medium of expression , than dance is a style of expression .
Combining with tone , rhythm and melody , dance has been the voice of our emotions .
Whether the climate changes or the environment , a different dance has enriched the traditions of our country .
The contribution of these traditions are evident even more , when a state is recognized with the name of a dance .
Although with every art the wisdom of its artist is also very important .
When any good artist gives a performance , then it strengthens the tradition .
There is an importance of discovery too in it because the higher the imagination of the artist , the better is the performance .
Then whether bring Radha - Krishna on the stage , or associate some other theme to your art .
Of course the new-age people have got into new colors , but also it is interesting that the number of people interested in ancient arts such as classical music and dance is growing .
Its most important reason would be artists working with great indulgence .
If the artist associated with cultural activities has honor and integrity for the art within himself , then his art always remains relevant .
This is the identity of our social culture .
The classical dance of India is famous in the whole world .
Anyway dance has no boundaries .
If our country has this ancient tradition , then there is also no shortage of people who would like it in the entire world .
Although there has been not much change in its artforms , but the mix of body postures and emotions in this is amazing .
I personally have believed that whatever be the dance , if there is an efficient presentation of it and it is properly choreographed , then nothing can be better than this for the audiences .
Recently I and my team had given a presentation of classical dance in Edinburgh International Art Festival , the title of which was ` Uncharted Seas ` .
The media and the public there appreciated this a lot .
Similarly , we also were praised in the All Asia Art Festival in England .
Something similar happened when we performed in Cambodia and Laos .
The meaning of the statement is that whatever the people know about classical dance in India , the foreigners know less than that , neither of them know our vocabulary , nor our culture .
Inspite of that , they tie themselves with the attraction of art through the information they get during the program .
When an artist gives his performance , then he must keep a few things in mind .
Firstly she should have Classicism within her , then only she will succeed in the scale of tradition .
Second the content should be good and the most important thing they she should be very careful for the presentation .
Then she will definitely get the applause and accolades of the audience .
The Supreme Court has raised questions on the recognition given only to male makeup artist in the entire film industry of the country .
Justice Radhakrishnan and Justice Dipak Misra ` s two member bench have issued notices to three central ministries including 15 organizations on Friday in the case of not giving recognition to female makeup artists in all film industries of the country .
On behalf of Charu Khanna who has been the victim of not being given work as a makeup artist in Mumbai and South Indian cinema world , the National Commission for Women has been fighting a case in the Supreme Court on this matter for the last four years .
Jyothika Kalra , fighting the case on behalf of the Commission has told that expressing their amazement on the behavior towards women in the cinema world , both the judges of the Supreme Court have asked why the female makeup artists are not capable of worki ?
The court also asked how the livelihood of others gets in danger by women working in any of the industries .
The Supreme Court has issued notices to the Information - Broadcasting Ministry , Ministry of Women and Child Development and Ministry of Labor in the case of female makeup artists not being given membership in any makeup artist association of the cinema world .
The Court also asked all the respective trade unions the reason for adopting such an attitude towards women .
Centuries ago a severe storm came in the capital of Magadha .
At the same time a vulture came flying from somewhere and to avoid water sat on a platform made next to a wall .
Looking him at that state , a wealthy man from town brought him to a safe place .
The vultures after returning to the mountain thought that the ` Magadha ` wealthy man has done a favor on us .
We should return his favor .
But how should we return the favor .
The first vulture suggested a way for this that whatever valuable thing we get next we should drop it in the courtyard of the wealthy man .
They would pick up the clothes drying on the terrace .
They would pick up some woman ` s ornament and drop it in the courtyard of the wealthy man .
When the wealthy man came to know this thing , he got all those items placed in a separate room .
When the King discovered that the vultures are stealing he got one of those vultures captured by the soldiers .
The King asked - ` Do you steal and take away people ` s clothes-ornaments ? ` .
The vulture told that the ` town wealthy man ` had saved our lives .
We are paying back for the benevolence .
The king questioned the town wealthy man regarding this , than he told about him having the stolen goods and also said that he kept them apart so that whatever is due to whosoever should take it .
Then the town wealthy man explained the vulture that it is good to return the favor , but its method must also be right .
Indeed , the spirit of returning a favor in place of a favor is commendable , but it should be done appropriately considering the public interest .
The final of the beauty contest ` Femme Miss North India 2013 ` will be held in New Delhi on Friday .
More than a thousand beauties of UP , Bihar , Uttarakhand , Rajasthan , Madhya Pradesh , Jammu and Himachal Pradesh participated in the competition held in various cities for about a month .
Amar Ujala dot com and Shree Sai Entertainment organised the competition .
The grooming session of the 20 beauties preparing for finals has been going on for the last eight days in Delhi .
During this time the beauties took lessons in makeup , choreography , styling , personal development .
Dehradun ` s Diksha Sharma told on Thursday that it was a spectacular experience during the grooming session .
The experts gave many tips on fitness , skincare , glamour and media .
I am nervous but excited about the finals .
Although the Indian culture is unique in its own right , because the diversity which is in this country that is nowhere else .
The view of this creative and classic painting exhibition was available in Purva Cultural Center located at Vikas Marg .
These beautiful photographs of Delhi were effortlessly attracting the art lovers .
In the painting exhibition organised by Color and Focus , artists reaching from several states of the country exhibited great pictures on different topics on the surface of the canvas .
At one moment most of the pictures familiarize you with Indian culture and the next moment paintings based on female empowerment and female oppression inspire the society for duties and rights .
The painting exhibition will go on till 15 March .
The artists of Assam , Haryana , Punjab , Uttar Pradesh , and Delhi gave distinct form by decorating the surface of the canvas .
Every artist has presented many paintings according to their own perspective .
Asssam ` s Arundhati Choudhury has given imagination an artistic and a creative form and presented it in a balanced manner .
In the same series , aged painter Sarfraz Ahmed has produced the beauty of Delhi and royal paintings in a great way on the canvas .
Former Miss Universe and actress Sushmita Sen and former Pakistani cricketer Wasim Akram strongly denied those ` news ` doing the rounds in the media in which it was said that the two stars are planning to get married .
They said to the media that it should respect the privacy of the people .
It is noteworthy that there was a speculation in a section of the media that these two are in love with each other for the last few years and are soon going to get married .
But the 37-year-old Sushmita clarified the matter on Twitter on Friday that the 46-year-old Akram is her good friend , nothing more than that .
She wrote that she has been reading about her plans of marrying Akram since some time , which is completely nonsense .
He is just my friend , and will always remain so .
Holding the media irresponsible Sushmita said that there was a great woman in Akram ` s life . the rumors are completely useless and offensive .
On the other hand Akram also denied the rumors and said that he want to spend all his time with the two kids .
A special festival is to be held in the capital on ` literature ` which is present in the form of a compere between India ` s classical and folk dance , music , theater , art and all the disciplines pertaining to arts .
Its specialty will be that besides the giants of literature , great artists from different disciplines of arts will also talk about the literature on arts .
Organized by the Sahitya Akademi , this literature festival will be held from February 22 to 18 in Mandi House .
Regarding the literature festival Dr . Srinivas Rao , the Secretary of the Academy said that not limiting the festival of literature to paper presentation and lectures , this is being brought to the premises of Ravindra Bhavan .
In this festival organised in a new way , the presence of artists associated with music , dance and theater will make literature more attractive and extended .
In the literature festival there will be the screening of the documentary produced and directed by Gulzar , the relationship of literature and cinema , literature and media , literature and theater , special discussion on literature - painting - music - dance by its experts .
Besides this , the winning writers of this year ` s Sahitya Akademy Award 2012 will be awarded .
Today , it feels like taking a risk .
A problem like an effort to feed jaggery balls after having the sweet of Kaju Katali .
But the cook whose life went by making jaggery laddus , how can he leave ?
So I too will not leave it .
I will do only what I feel like doing .
Are you even listening to me or not ? ` Turn around ! Where is your mind brother ` .
People like me or older than me must have understood by now what I ` m talking about but the new generation must be told that I ` m actually going to talk about a comedian who is considered as the first star comedian of the Indian cinema .
A comedian whose fees was more than of the big heroes of his times .
Who was not kept in the films just for the tempering , but was also a regular hero .
Full name Nur Muhammad Charlie .
In the initial phase of the Indian cinema , the name of Charlie comes up among the people who did comedy .
Charlie meaning Noor Mohammed , born in 1912 in Porbandar in Gujarat , Noor Mohammed added ` Charlie ` to his name getting inspired by the great actor Charlie Chaplin .
And look at the amazing thing that he found fame with this name instead of his real name .
Long before 1931 when Indian cinema got its voice , during the era of the silent movies the stars like Laurel-Hardy Chaplin rocked the world of comic movies .
Along with humor there is a deep and sharp touch of sarcasm in these films .
Specially in Charlie Chaplin ` s films .
There used to be some similar efforts in India , but with the advent of the talkies efforts in this direction were intensified .
Then four artists like Dixit , Gauri , Kesari and E . Bilimoria emerged .
Sardar Chandulal Shah and his partner Mamajiwala Gohar ` s company Ranjit Movietone made a film in 1932 with all these four , which proved to be hugely successful .
The name of this film was , sorry were - ` Char Chakram ` aka ` Four Rascals ` Alias ` Chandaal Chaukdi ` aka ` Chaar Bhondu ` .
The same year a film of Elephanta Movietone , Punjab released ` Park Daman Rassaka ` alias ` Innocent Dancer ` alias ` Nirdosh Nartika ` .
A comedian who came in this film with the name ` Baba Charlie ` attracted the attention of the people by his gestures full of antics and innocent style on the screen .
Although this actor was working from the silent film era , but he came in the eyes of the audience from this film only .
This actor other than his comic talent had another natural talent , that graced his success even more .
The talent was of singing .
He used to sing his songs himself in his typical style and used to give it a nice touch .
Because of this reason he had started getting a lot of work .
The song sung by him in 1939 ` s film ` Thokar ` , ` Jab se mili hai tere der ki khaak , sandal ka lagana chod diya ` got very popular .
Charlie was himself the hero and himself the director in 1941 ` s film ` Dhandhera ` .
One of the songs of this film is very funny , which had a lot of significance in the times of the the Second World War .
Look at this song written by D . N. Madhok ` Hitler khaye anda , Goring hua mustanda  Mussolini bechara kabhi murgi kabhi anda ` .
There is a song written by Madhok and sung by Charlie in this film only whose stanza became a great hit in the film ` Tezaab ` in 1988 and gave stardom to Madhuri .
The counting stops at ` twelve ` in Charlie ` s song and the rhythm builds up like this - ` Teri nazar ne mujhko maara ` , after that again reverse counting starts from ` twelve ` and stops at the line joining ` one ` - ` meri taraf zara toh dekh ` .
He was the hero of the popular heroine Mehtaab in A . R . Kaardaar ` s 1943 film ` Sanjog ` .
The song sung by Charlie in this film ` O dil nanda-3 , palat tera dhyaan kidar hai bhai ! ` became very popular .
In fact , the phrase `` Palat tera dhyaan hai kidhar `` was Charlie ` s catchphrase .
If you look back a little and recall , then you will also remember that this phrase has been used later in many film songs .
Also the people who have seen the era of the horse chariots will remember how badly was this phrase used .
In this film Sir Naushad made Charlie sing a romantic song with Suriya ` udte hue panchhi kaun unko bataye paas mein baithe hai , dil unka hua jaaye ` .
Watching this complete seventy year old film in today ` s world seems like re-living the bygone times through the old pictures of grandfathers hanging in the house .
I especially enjoy when the high voices of supud - supud of the characters drinking tea is shown in the film .
Along with it such dialogues - ` Daughter I would marry you when you complete B . A . ` .
Second ` If you have a stomach ache  then take Ginger ` .
Everything was going on fine here but then the partition of the nation happened in 1947 .
Like many people , frightened by the riots , Charlie moved to Pakistan , leaving a great film career .
The condition of Pakistan ` s film industry was very weak at that time .
As a result there were such little opportunity in front of people like Charlie of working that finally loosing hope he came back to Mumbai in around 1960 on a temporary permit .
Till this time the whole scenario of Mumbai had changed .
Adding their own style to Charlie ` s acting style comedians like Johhny Walker had got established .
Mehmood had started his journey towards stardom .
In these circumstances Sandulal Shah gave Charlie an opportunity in his film ` Zameen ke taare ` , but things didn ` t work out .
After this in the next three years he got work only in two other films ` Zamana badal gaya ` and ` Akali mat jaaeo ` .
On top of that some people were busy in a campaign to get the permits canceled of the artists who had come back from Pakistan .
At last the government refused to give Charlie Indian citizenship .
He had to go back to Pakistan .
He died on June 30 , 1983 .
By that time they had left Pakistan and settled in U.S .
The story is the first and basic element of any movie .
Such films are always seen a lot whose stories are based on reality .
There stories are real or illusory , it is often difficult to predict .
`` The Fifth Estate `` , the hollywood movie based on the famous journalist and hacker Julian Assange is also a similar film , whose direction is done by Bill Condon .
Condon who has won the Academy Award for Best Screenplay for Gods and Monsters has also done the direction of the Twilight series .
Even more special people are associated with the movie , but its specialty is its story , which is built on actual events .
Who does not know Julian Assange and WikiLea ?
Both are synonyms of each other .
The credit of bringing Investigative journalism on the website goes to Julian Assange himself .
In 2010 , after the revelation of the U . S . military and diplomatic documents on WikiLeaks both came in notice .
Australian citizen Julian Assange has taken diplomatic asylum in the Ecuadorian embassy in London .
Sweden wants to implicate him in a sexual assault case , but Assange says that all this is happening under American pressure .
Assange says that this cultural attack on us through the film is also under the pressure from America .
Assange is on American target after leaking America ` s confidential information on Wikileaks in 2010 .
The movie `` The Fifth Estate `` is built around the same Julian Assange WikiLeaks and his former colleague German Technology activist Daniel Domscheit-Berg .
The source of the film ` s script is Daniel Domscheit-Berg ` s book that came in 2011 `` Inside WikiLeaks : My Time With Julian Assange At The World ` s Most Dangerous Website `` and David Leigh and Luke Harding ` s book ` Wikileaks : Inside Julian Assange ` s War on Secrecy ` .
The film is being made on an actual event this is its specialty , but the bigger specialty is to show the opinion of Daniel Domscheit-Berg in it .
Berg who had held the post of the spokesperson of WikiLeaks had left WikiLeaks in 2010 due to differences with Assange .
In 2011 , Berg ` s book `` Inside WikiLeaks . `` came on which most of the film ` s part is based , hence there is a speculation that Julian Assange has been presented as the villain in the film .
This doubt has been expressed by Assange as well .
On the script sent by Film director Condon , Assange said at the awards ceremony in Sam Adams on 24th January , 2013 that it is a misleading propaganda against WikiLeaks and his colleagues .
Lies on top of lies are woven in this and the passages inciting war against Iran have been added .
In the first scene itself of the film it has been shown that Iran is building nuclear weapons in its military compound .
Director Bill Condon tells Julian Assange separately that it will take decades to understand the entire revolutionary informational effect of Wikileaks , hence this film does not blame any subject neither does it give any conclusion .
Famous from the movie Sherlok , Benedict Cumberbatch is playing the character of Julian Assange in ` The Fifth Estate ` .
He believes that through this film we can understand the impact of WikiLeaks and how the foundations of this whistle blowing website was laid .
Since a film ` s influence is on a very big scale , so Wikileaks is considering this film as a cultural attack .
Releasing in November , whether this film which spans from the period 2007 to 2010 , excites a socio - cultural earthquake , this only time can tell but one thing is for sure that the film would be nothing short of any sensational news on Wikileaks .
Till Monday the acclaimed film ` Jolly LLB ` had a turnover of Rs 14.41 crores at the box office in India .
Given the ordinary budget of the film the trade pundits believe that the film ` s production company , Fox Star India will be in profit .
This film did not do well at all in its Satellite and smaller centers .
The film had most of its earnings from Delhi - UP , Punjab and Mumbai .
Yash Raj Films ` ` My Dad ` s Maruti ` could not appeal much to audiences and in the first weekend and the two days after that was only able to collect 5.40 crores .
Neil Nitin Mukesh ` s ` 3 G ` also could not do much , although it did slightly better business in the first week in relatively smaller centers and collected Rs 5 crores .
In the recently released films , Tigmanshu Dhulia ` s ` Sahib Bibi Aur Gangster Returns ` did a business of Rs 18.75 crores .
Sanjay - the satirical film ` Saare jahan se mehanga ` did not work because of the weak script .
It is clear from the 9 crore business by John Abraham ` s ` I me aur hum ` that the film will not be able to recover even its production cost .
Kai Po Che did good business , Ram Gopal Varma ` s ` The Attack of the 26 ` was declared a flop by the Industry .
It did a business of around Rs 11.50 crore so far .
Sanjay Dutt ` s ` Zila Ghaziabad ` , was also in the same category with 16 crore box office collections .
Recently a major hit has been the film ` Kai Po Che ` with newcomers , which has collected Rs 49.5 crore only in India .
Also the low budget film ` Anybody Can Dance ` , made with newcomers has put itself on the list of the biggest hits by collecting 45.5 crore .
The government who has been giving away the National Film Award in the field of Indian cinema since last year , from this year will also be honoring the films of the students majoring in cinema .
In this centenary year in which the Indian Cinema completes its 100 years , among the many schemes of the government one of the schemes is that there should be a special festival of the films made by the students of cinema and these students to be encouraged by awarding the good films .
National Awards are being started for this .
The festival of the films of the students are organised in France , Germany , and many countries including America where only their films are screened .
The Information and Broadcasting Ministry has recently written for the approval of such schemes to the Prime Minister ` s Office to celebrate the 100 years of cinema .
Work on them would escalate on receiving the permission .
The Ministry has given the responsibility to Film and Television Institute in Pune and Satyajit Ray Film and Television Institute in Kolkata under it to organize these Festivals .
The government has also decided that the National Student Film Festival will be held each year at a fixed time .
At the beginning both these institutes will be given the responsibility of organizing it by turn .
The Ministry told an official that a total of 14 awards will be presented under different categories .
The awards will be given to feature film , non feature film , -LRB- documentary and short film -RRB- .
The process of deciding the prize money awarded to the winning films is underway .
During these functions , seminars , workshops , Open Forums involving films and master classes withrenowned film personalities , etc . will also be organized .
The festival will be for all those students across the country who are studying courses related to cinema in government or non-governmental institutions .
After getting trapped in controversies , Priyanka Chopra is very careful about the case concerning Khans .
Her name is sometimes associated with Shah Rukh Khan , sometimes with Salman Khan .
Currently , she is considered close to Shah Rukh Khan .
Probably this is why they outright rejected Anurag Kashyap ` s proposal for his short film .
Commemorating the 100 years of Indian cinema , a film with the title ` Bombay Talkies ` is being made .
There will be short films of Anurag Basu , Dibakar Banerjee , Karan Johar , Anurag Kashyap and Zoya Akhtar in it .
Anurag Kashyap has planned to make the film on a popular star from a fan ` s perspective .
He first wrote the script keeping in mind the the current popularity of Salman Khan and urged Priyanka Chopra to play the role of his tremendous fan .
Priyanka Chopra liked the script , but in view of potential disputes , she refused to do the film .
She did not want her new friend to get angry considering her close to Salman Khan .
After her denial , in a haste , Anuraag had to write a film centered on Amitabh Bachchan .
According to sources close to Priyanka , she had to tell Anurag Kashyap a no due to the business of the promotion of her first music album `` In My City `` and the shooting of her upcoming films .
After ` Raaz 3 ` actress Bipasha Basu will once again be seen with director Sampurna Varma on his horror film ` Atma ` .
According to Bipasha , people think that I have become an expert of horror films , but I ` m still too scared of ghosts .
My younger sister has watched so many horror films that now she is not at all scared .
My niece is less scared than I am whose name is Nia .
Just to lose my own fears , I have kept the name of my reel life daughter four year old Doel Dhawan as Nia .
I requested the director of the film to give the name Nia .
I told him that it is necessary to remind me of my niece to maintain the morale of Doel and me during the filming of a horror story .
Suparn Varma ` s ` Atma ` is a horror triangle between a daughter , mom and dad .
Ram Gopal Varma has come up with the ` The Attacks Of 26 ` , based on the backdrop of the Mumbai terror attack two years ago .
According to him , the memories of Mumbai attacks terrorize us even today .
The culprits were caught due to the diligence of NSG commandos and the Mumbai police .
I have just tried to show through the film that how the incident was carried out .
What the victims and Mumbai Police Commissioner Rakesh Moira went through .
The film has been made placing the attacks on the Leopold Cafe in Colaba in the center .
We went on those location and also shooted .
We made a set to show the Taj Hotal .
The role of the then police commissioner Rakesh Maria of Mumbai will be played by Nana Patekar .
He said that the film is made keeping Rakesh Maria in the center , but it is not a biopic .
The film is also dedicated to Mumbai .
It will not make the audience cry or laugh , but will force to consider which world the terrorists are ?
What beasts they become .
For the last four decades , Big B Amitabh Bachchan has been ruling the hearts of the audience .
The angry young man of Zanjeer -LRB- 1973 -RRB- or the brave Jai of Sholay -LRB- 1975 -RRB- , the stellar guy of Muqaddar Ka Sikandar -LRB- 1978 -RRB- or the emotional lover of Silsila -LRB- 1981 -RRB- , Kallu Don of Kalia -LRB- 1981 -RRB- , or the comedian of Namakhalal -LRB- 1982 -RRB- , Vijay Verma of Deewar -LRB- 1975 -RRB- or Vijay of Don -LRB- 1978 -RRB- , who can forget Amitabh Bachchan ` s earlier films .
Whatever popularity his films got , the same love of the people was received by the posters and songs of those films .
The style of Amitabh Bachchan ` s dance , action or romance on the film posters attracted the people a lot .
The fans would also intend to take off the posters and take them home .
People remembered the songs of his films to its dialogues by heart .
The popularity of the Amitabh Bachchan films during the Angry Man times still exists .
Given their popularity , an online sale of the posters of his some special films by Lobby Arts and LP records .
Four - five years ago , such things were easily available in the second-hand market of Delhi and Mumbai .
But due to their increasing demand , they have started decreasing from the market and it is a hard task to collect them now .
Although the trend of movie memorabilia is new in the country .
Although this trend is known as status overseas and the LP records or the long-playing records was used to listen to film songs and dialogues .
The facility of lobby cards is used in small towns even today .
This is different that various computerized gadgets cassette , CD and pen drive have taken up the place of LP records .
The interest in the collection of film memorabilia has increased in people in the past decade .
The online sale of Big B ` s posters and Lobby Art sale is for such people only .
The director of Dream Online , Ramona Singh who sells celebrity items and memorable products online .
She says that such a sale associated with Amitabh Bachchan is sure to be a hit .
Noteworthy is that Ramona had organised a similar sale on the occasion of the 60th birthday of Amitabh Bachchan .
However , she also agrees that collecting such objects now is not that easy .
She said that earlier such posters were easily available in Old Delhi and Mumbai , but now its not the same atmosphere .
Especially the posters of the films Sholay , Deewar , etc are rarely available .
In this context , Yamini said that for such online sales nothing appears better than Amitabh at the moment .
His popularity is unmatched abroad as well besides in the country .
That is the reason why NRIs are the largest buyers of such goods .
The price of this collection starts from a few thousand .
The most expensive item is a poster if ` Sholay ` , the price of which is fixed at Rs 9,800 .
Yet another strong item is the LP of the film ` Kalia ` in which along with the songs there are powerful dialogues of the film .
All such items have been kept in this sale , which can be seen under ` Bollywood ` s Big B ` under the ` The Story ` section of the website .
The online sale is concluding on 11th March .
Jackie Bhagnani ` s launch happened in an awesome manner , but he went into oblivion with the same speed .
Jackie , son of the famous producer Vasu Bhagnani , will soon be seen in the film ` Rangrez ` .
And he has found a very good way to get this film into limelight .
Jackie has bought the rights of the song Gangnam Style that got popular through Youtube and has also shooted it for his upcoming movie .
Jackie says that it is a gift for his father Vashu from him .
It is to be seen whether this gift is helpful in getting the film a hit or whether he has to find another way to impress his father .
Although Jackie had to spend all his savings to buy the rights of this song .
` Ranraz ` is a remake of a Tamil film , Priya Anand is the heroine opposite Jackie in it .
The craze of Shah Rukh Khan is not going away for Anushka Sharma .
She says that people are not able to understand Shah Rukh Khan , and thats why they call him arrogant .
Anushka who has become a good friend of Shahrukh Khan is coming with Aamir Khan in the film ` PK ` , and now it is only Salman Khan who is left in the Khan trio of the industry with who Anushka is eager to work .
She has to say that she is just waiting for the offer , if she gets the chance to work with Salman and she likes the script , she is not going to leave it .
If Anushka gets a film with Salman , she would beat Kareena and Katrina in a way .
Because Katrina has the three Khans in her list , but has not been praised for good acting .
Anushka is far ahead of her in this case .
Sonal Chauhan is in a lot of limelight these days .
Starting her career from the film ` Jannat ` , Sonal is in a lot of highlight these days because of her beauty and fitness .
Sonal Chauhan will soon be seen in the film ` 3 G ` with Neil Nitin Mukesh .
Sonal ` s red hot bikini in the film is in the limelight and also the thirty kisses with Neil .
Although Sonal declines the news of the kissing scenes , but does not forget to discuss her bikini body .
The limelight is that Sonal is looking amazingly slim in the bikini scene .
Looking at her slim body , it is natural to think that she must have done a lot of dieting .
But Sonal says that she absolutely avoids practices like dieting .
Yes , she definitely goes to the gym for fitness .
Her fitness mantra is that eat everything , but burn calories in the gym .
She says that one should definitely go to the gym four days a week .
She made her body so attractive just by going to the gym , otherwise she does not like to control in the case of eating .
These days Sonal herself admires herself .
According to her she especially likes her long legs in her body .
By the way Sonal is not just beautiful by face but by mind also .
Then came the reports that Neil has proposed her for marriage and Sonal has called off the frienship getting angry with his obsession .
The real test of the chemistry of this friendship will be in the film ` 3 G ` .
` 3 G ` is a horror thriller film which will be released on March 15 .
Not too much time has passed .
Just three - four years back , Bollywood producers - directors were not able to understand what exactly the audience want to s ?
Everyone was busy in experimenting .
But what the Indian audience liked was small town locations on the big screen .
Meaning the filming of Indian villages and towns in Bollywood .
Where did this trend began from , this can not be clearly told because such movies have been made earlier also in our place .
One need not think too hard and the memories of successful movies like ` Lagaan ` , ` Swades ` and ` Gadar comes to our mind .
These tell that the viewers have liked the villages and towns earlier as well .
Although Sooraj Barjatya ` s ` Vivaah ` and ` Hum saath saath hai ` also has village locations but it seems Prakash Jha has come in the industry taking an oath that he will make most of his movies with the background based on villages or towns .
In addition to that our black & white movies were made with rural locations only .
However , talking about the starting point of a series of such films or use of it as a trend that came out or using it as a trend , then the success of 2010 release ` Dabang ` and ` Peepli Live ` can be considered its inspiration .
In both , the filming of the Indian villages was done in their original form .
Actually , even if villages or towns were shown in films made before these then it was made so beautiful by decorating it that even the villages were seen as comfortable in the cities .
But ` Dabangg ` showed the village in the same style as it actually was .
In ` Peepli Live ` , the problems of the villagers and the constraint to live in poverty was very vividly shown on screen .
These two films forced the Bollywood producers - directors to think that if films are made on such subjects , the audience will like it .
They realized that people are trying to see the reality of the villages and towns .
Thus , the process began .
To show the stories associated with villages and towns on the big screen .
Some were successful , some failed .
But whichever failed did because of weak script and acting , not because of stories based on small towns .
Meaning small towns are still hit .
Recently , the well known author Chetan Bhagat and producer - director Nagesh Kukunur regarded the chance of visiting the Indian villages with the National Geographic Channel as special .
Not just because they were getting a show , but because they will get a chance to see Indian villages upclose .
Nicole Faria ! Yes , one more celebrity trying her hand at acting in Bollywood from the world of modeling .
Actually Nichole has been Miss Earth 2010 .
Her first film would be Divya Khosla Kumar ` s directed untitled film .
The film ` s title has not yet been decided , but according to the news the film will be in the category of ` Student of the Year ` , in which Nicole will also be playing a college going girl .
There will be four other female leads in the film besides her .
The shooting of the film is currently going in South Africa .
The film will be purely commercial , so one would get to see plenty of glamorous faces in its star cast .
The story of the film has the collision between two school students as theme .
One school is of Indian students and another school of foreign students .
It is a musical film .
Very few people know that Nicole is from Bangalore and because of her family background from south as soon as the news of her Bollywood came , people have started comparing her with Deepika Padukone and Aishwarya .
Nicole ` s work still remains to be seen .
But there is no doubt in it that if Nicole is serious about making a career in Bollywood , then she will face stiff competition from not only Deepika , but her contemporary Diana Penty as well .
Everyone has seen Diana ` s acting talent in `` Cocktail `` .
Prithviraj Kapoor and Kidar Sharma , both started their work life from Kolkata ` s ` New Theatres .
Prithviraj as an actor and Kidar as a lyricist .
Prithviraj ` s salary was mere fifty rupees per month and Kidar got only Rs . five in lieu of writing a song .
Both had deep friendship .
Since both were crazy about Urdu poetry , hence they did not want to leave out any chance in which they lag behind to outdo each other .
There were many areas in Calcutta those days where electricity had not come .
Prithviraj and Kidar were the residents of such areas .
Incidentally there was a lamp post installed by Municipality near Kidar ` s home , standing in the light of which both would debate on various topics for hours .
One day something awesome happened .
When they both arrived at the post , there discussion was not over yet .
Who is the greatest poet , Ghalib or Mir , they both were arguing on the question .
The director of New Theatres , BN Sarkar used to go home taking the same way .
That evening too when he passed through that road he saw that both are completely lost in poetry .
Both did greet him of course , but then resumed to their conversation .
The next morning when Sarkar walked past that way again from the studio to his home , then he was surprised to see that both were standing there itself and their debate had not reached a final conclusion , and none of them remembered to go home .
Bollywood and Hollywood have become global in a large way .
In the present world when the Indian producers - directors make movies then they definitely think about the international perspective because a significant proportion of the profits comes from overseas release .
Many Hollywood films are a hit with their release in India .
These Hollywood films are being watched from big cities to small towns .
Most of these are action movies .
Lets watch the Hollywood movies which will be releasing in January and February .
More than a hundred films will be releasing in January including ` The Grief Tourist ` , ` Shadow of the Monarch ` , ` Alleged Gangster ` , ` Master Race for Mars ` , ` Hope For Love ` , ` American Disipline ` , ` Killer B 3 ` and ` Indiscreetion ` .
Around 60 films will be releasing in February .
Some films not only were acclaimed in Europe but also worldwide .
As much as Pop Singer Taylor famous for her beauty and charms , the same she is because of her new chart-buster song I Know You were trouble .
Swift ` s this song is currently on the fourth number in the Billboard Top 100 chart buster songs .
It is being said that Taylor Swift wrote this song for her ex boyfriend Harry Styles .
It has just been four - five months that Taylor and Harry broke up .
Harry is 19 years old and is considered to be a Heartthrob .
Some time back a picture of his with an Australian model got circulated on the internet and Taylor ` s heart was broken .
The voice that came from a broken heart was the song ` I Know You were trouble ` .
Which is taking 23 years old Taylor to the heights of success .
Taylor said in an interview that she already knew that girls become Harry ` s fans so fast that expecting loyalty from Harry is a dream .
Nevertheless , Taylor took a shot because earlier while dating Harry Taylor felt that Harry was her companion for seven lives .
The news is that the model for whom Harry broke the heart of beautiful Taylor , he has left her also .
Really , Harry is in trouble .
Gulzar saab has done so much work that looking at his artistry and personality , one would go in amazement .
Actually Mr . Gulzar got active in whichever genre , he left a deep imprint .
At this point in life neither his pen stops , neither the pen of those who write about him .
Like a saint , Gulzar stays engrossed in his own work .
Though he is in the film world , he stays far away from the filmy delusion .
His bungalow Boskiana is like a small cottage .
There are very few occasions when he gets out , leaving the hut .
No , he is not at all unwell .
They still plays badminton like a young guy and has the ability make the opponent tired .
The same youth is always present in his compositions .
That is why he still brings romantics to his songs like in Saans mein teri saans mili toh mujhe saans aayi . -LRB- film Jab tak hai jaan -RRB- or is found saying Darling Ankhon se ankhe chaar karne do ... -LRB- film Saat khoon maaf -RRB- .
Gulzar saab goes abreast with the times .
These are recently released movies and are the movies of the youth .
Otherwise there are hundreds of songs which contain every color of life like Warna toh mora gora rang laye le , Tere bina jiya jaaye na , Phir wahi raat , Do deewnae sehar mein , Bole re papeehara , Humko mann kin shakti dena , Musafir hoon yaaron , Omaajhi re , Aanewaala pal , Naam gum jaayega , Hazar rahe mud ke dekhi , Dil dhundhta hai phir wahi phursate raat din , Ruke ruke se kadam , Is mos se jaate hai , Tum aa gaye ho nur aa gaya hai , Chappa chappa charkha chale , Chikni chpdi chachi and Kajrare Kajrare .
Today there is no songwriter who wants to embrace Gulzar ` s style .
But the truth is that Gulzar is intensely inspiring , but he can not be copied .
He is very difficult in this case .
The choice of words and expressions like him is a rare situation .
Gulzar saab and songs have already become synonymous , but the other aspects of his creativity are equally bright .
His films like Mere apne , Parichay , Aandhi , Mausam , Kinaara , Khusboo , Namkeen , Angoor , Ijaazat , Achaanak , Meera , lekin , libaas , and Maachis have got the status of milestones and classics . The direction of the serial Mirza Ghalib on the small screen has like become a criterion of superiority .
Gulzar is a big name in Urdu literature .
Chauras raat , Raavi paar , Pukhraj , Chaand Pukhraj and creations like Triveni prove him as a great writer .
The amount of Gulzar Saab ` s work for children , the greatest writers can also get inspiration from that .
The unsurpassed creation like Boski ` s Panchatantra holds an important place in Indian children ` s literature .
Here he is also writing regularly for hindi ` s top literary magazine Gyanoday .
His column is very popular also .
Yes , Gulzar Saab has been very rich in this regard that he gets a lot of respect .
Emraan Hashmi is now slowly going away from his serial kisser image .
Do not think that he has stopped giving such scenes in his films .
The thing actually is that he is now getting popularity for acting and variety in his films besides ` kissing ` .
After the film ` Dirty Picture ` Emraan Hashmi has also got Vishal Bharadwaj ` s film ` Ek thi Daayan ` and ` Ghanchakkar ` with Vidya Balan .
Imran Hashmi is playing the role of a master thief to break the lock in this film .
Imran has become a fan of Mithun Chakraborty in the film , Imran will be seen dancing dressed up like him .
He will be seen doing disco on two of Mithun Da ` s famous songs ` I Am A Disco Dancer ` and ` Yaad aa raha hai tera pyaar ` in the film .
Really this scheme of Imran of attracting the viewers through dance instead of ` kissing ` is actually a surprise .
Actress Mahi Gill is busy these days in the promotion of the film ` Sahib Bibi Aur Gangster Returns ` .
She has been seen visiting cities in this matter and for this work she has also kept a strange condition infront of the director of her film .
Her demand was that whichever city they go to , her driver must be a handsome young man .
The thing to be paid attention to is that in the the first part of the film ` Sahib Bibi Aur Gangster ` , there is a driver of Mahi ` s with who she falls in love with .
The role of the driver has been played by Randeep Hooda and he has played it in a brilliant manner .
Now Mahi will be once again seen in the role of Jimmy Shergil ` s wife who is playing the role of a Nawab in the film ` s sequel , ` Sahib Bibi Aur Gangster Returns ` .
But this time her character has been shown as far more ambitious than her character in the first part .
According to Mahi her role is very deadly in the film .
Jimi Shergil who has become Saheb in the movie is dependent on a wheelchair and that is why his wife Mahi has control over his life .
That is why to get her Saheb ` s attention the wife is willing to go to all limits .
Lets see if Mahi wins the hearts of the people with her performance or not .
Has hosted a show ` Love story ` involving stories .
About ` Jaane bhi do ` Nigar Khan says that this show will bring such stories from the glamour world about which people do not know at all .
Nigar says that this show will show the facts instead of the gossip linked to these news .
This show can be watched every Saturday night at 8 pm at ABP News .
In Hollywood movies , the age of the artists does not matter .
He performs every kind of acting .
They get the best and powerful role according to the talent .
But this is not in Bollywood .
Here an artist is bound in certain types of roles due to increasing age .
Bollywood ` s Dream Girl Hema Malini who has reached the age of sixty expressed her disappointment somewhat like this in an event held in Delhi .
Although on the question of her forthcoming film she laughed and said that she herself wants to see her on the screen soon .
On the occasion of the launch of a food product in Delhi ` s hotel The Park , she said that staying healthy is essential to live life .
It is important to eat low-fat or fat-free things for this .
She also told her fitness mantra during this time .
64 years old Hema said that she drinks plenty of water to keep herself healthy .
She gets up at six in the morning , does Yoga and takes breakfast at nine .
She said that if the day has a good start , then the whole day goes by nicely .
In response to a question , she said that beauty is in the eyes of the onlookers .
Famous as Bihar Kokila , folk singer Sharda Sinha ` s awesome performance added to the beauty of the Bihar Festival .
Her songs delighted the audience on the he second day of the festival held at Dilli Haat , Pitampura , Delhi .
She won the hearts of the audience by singing melodious songs on jhumar , thumri , holi and videshiya .
The people connected to the music of Bihar and made the whole atmosphere musical .
Sharda mesmerized the people with her magical notes in an almost one-hour presentation .
Sang the verses of Krishna devotee Meera , dedicated to women ` s empowerment .
She synchronized her notes with the musical tones .
Piya ji maari naina tori jogi . she mesmerized all the listeners sitting here with such beautiful lines .
She sang the holi song Bijori mori lal chunari piya . wa paniya ke jahaaj se palatniya , bhai ke dulaara . so beautifully that the listeners got lost in it .
On this occasion Singer Sharda Sinha said that the Bihar Festival refreshes the memories of the people of Bihar living here .
Even if actor Vivek Oberoi has now become the father of a son , but looking at the trees planted by his father , he gets lost in childhood memories . .
I was born in Hyderabad on September 3 .
Since my father Suresh Oberoi is from the film industry only , my education and upbringing happened in Mumbai .
My father is of Punjabi and mother Yashodhara is of Tamil descent .
I have an elder brother Prithviraj , younger brother Anand and a younger sister Meghna .
Everyone in my family calls me with the nickname ` Tiger ` .
I have done my initial studies from Mithibai College , Mumbai and master ` s degree in film acting from New York University .
Actor Imran Khan believes that TV is a direct and an easy way to reach the audience .
Recently , Imran Khan became a part of the TV serial ` Punarvivah ` for the promotion of his forthcoming film ` Once Upon A Time In Mumbai Again ` .
`` A big proportion of our country is TV viewer . .
`` If you want to promote anything , movie or a product , you will have to reach out to television viewers . .
` It ` s the most wonderful , easy and straightforward way . .
Imran said that he is ready to work in TV like his uncle superstar Aamir Khan , provided the proposal is of some entertaining and interesting program .
He said , `` So far I have not received any exciting and interesting offer , but whenever it happens , I would work happily on TV . .
Kahin dur jab din dhal jaaye . deewna hua baadal ... when the artist played such super hit songs on the piano notes , the audience went crazy .
The audience enjoyed the music coming out from the black and white key board .
This was the occasion of the program ` Harmony ` organized in the seminar hall of the Institute of Technology where Ankita Kumar , the piano player tand the daughter of the Delhi Police Commissioner Neeraj Kumar mesmerized the audience with the piano recital .
The music lovers got an opportunity to enjoy fine hindi and western classical music in this program held on Friday .
The audience fully enjoyed the songs of the black-and-white era of the Hindi cinema in this program decorated with music .
Babuji dheere chalna , pyaar mein jara sambhalna ... , ek ladki bhi bhaagi si ... , Madhuban mein radhika naache re . when Ankita played these songs on the piano , the whole hall started echoing with applause .
The fellow instrument players graced the presentation as well .
The pressure to attract and bring the audience to the theater has increased so much that most of the filmmakers have started to focus more on the posters and promos more than the film .
There is a trick involved in this thought , which attracts the audience for the opening and weekend collection in the theaters .
Rakesh Om Prakash Mehra must have been under pressure too , but as an honest film-maker of his generation , he has resorted to honesty from the look of the film to the film .
It is clear that this film is not Milkha Singh ` s autobiography or biography .
It is the story of that passion and determination that completes with hard work , will power and dedication .
` Bhaag Milkha Bhaag ` is an inspirational film .
Audiences of all ages should watch it wake up the Milkha within .
We also know Milkha Singh with the name Flying Sikh .
He was given this name by the President of Pakistan Ayub Khan .
The story is that after the partition Jawaharlal Nehru and Ayub Khan organised a sports meet between the two countries to let go of the bitterness and increase amicability .
Because of the scar from the past Milkha Singh had refused to go to Pakistan first but after Nehru ` s persuasion he went to Pakistan .
The anguish of his mind lessened with this trip .
People are not bad , situations are . this statement of a childhood friend soothes Milkha ` s pain .
We see in the film that Milkha Singh is not able to win a medal in the Rome Olympics due to this scar from the past .
Maybe it was a thought that came in Milkha Singh ` s mind later on or Rakesh Om Prakash Mehra and Prasoon Joshi are trying to make a story out of his defeat .
However , we get inspired by Milkha Singh ` s passion and determination .
If we notice Milkha Singh is the representative of that youth after independence who with the dreams of the Nehru Era move forward towards the unseen goal .
According to the film Milkha Singh crosses the hurdles of life one after the other , first for Biro , then for milk and eggs , then for the Indian team blazer .
Sister Ishri is also present in this journey .
The crying scenes of Milkha Singh ` s sister moistens the eyes in many scenes .
We get choked with Isri ` s plight and happiness .
Both the coaches who come in Milkha ` s army life and that bearded coach ... Prakashraj has mastered the art of acting .
The wonderful and selfless dedication of Milkha ` s two coaches is exemplary .
The player has thoughts , the thoughts give him the mould to get in shape .
Prasoon Joshi has woven the partition of the country very beautifully and in an effective manner in the film .
Life also goes on with the winning and defeat of sprinter Milkha Singh ` s race .
Prasoon Joshi has given an interesting dimension to the story through flashback and flashback in it .
Our interest in the character of Milkha persists .
We wish for his victory , but also want to know other things .
Writer - director has completed these expectations through little scenes , relationships and reactions .
First lets mention the supporting actors of the film .
The important characters of Milkha ` s life his sister , both coaches , Biro and other friends etc have also become essential to the film .
These characters have been played by Divya Dutta , Pawan Malhotra , Yogiraj Singh , Prakash Raj etc .
Particularly the engagement of Pawan Malhotra and Divya Dutta has far-reaching impact .
Both the actors actually give life to a character from any age , temperament and community .
Farhan Akhtar has established a new benchmark for the film artists of his generation through this film .
This is a new bench mark of an artist ` s hardwork and dedication for real or imaginary characters .
Farhan Akhtar has imbibed Milkha ` s outer appearance along with his internal bitterness .
He has remained Milkha from the starting till the end .
The actor who has become the child Milkha has prepared proper ground for him .
Bhaag Milkha Bhaag pictures the story of track , stadium , race and sports related scenes .
The cameraman Binod Pradhan has given an introduction of his creative imagination in choosing the angles of the scenes and their cinematography .
We are amazed how and where the camera can be placed .
The music and songs of the film are according to the film .
Some songs seemed ordinary on listening , but they produce appropriate emotions when they come with the scenes .
Prasoon Joshi has given inspirational words to Milkha ` s conflict and enthusiasm .
Bhaag Milkha Bhaag is the story of the dream of an ambitious young man in the Nehru Era , which has been presented well by Rakesh Om Prakash Mehra in that environment and society .
This film should definitely be seen and shown to the young generation .
A strange debate has been going on for some time , reading which it feels as if it is from the ancient times , and there is a difference among different historians .
But the topic of discussion is not hundred years old .
There are two things in the center of the discussion : Was Premchand a communist or n ?
And when was the Progressive Writer ` s Association found ?
Firstly the second question .
An officeholder in the Progressive Writer ` s Association , Tamil writer Punilan gave an interview to ` The Hindu ` on April 18 , 2012 .
According to him , ` Progressive Writers Association was established in 1936 and people like Premchand , Mulk Raj Anand , Sajjad Zaheer stayed under the leadership of this organization `` .
My friend Pranay Krishna wrote in his article `` 75 years of the progressive movement : ` the importance of the organization made in 1936 by Sajjad Zaheer was that it was the first great effort which showed the dream to complete the possibility of fulfilling this creative - revolutionary potential ` `` .
Now just listen to a statement from Mulk Raj Anand , one of the founders of the Progressive Writers Association : ` ` In 1935 , in the foggy days of London , in the wake of the capitalist crisis , the values in India which were affected , the way Indian masses were taken over by disappointment , distressed by that some of us co-founded the Progressive Writers ` Association -LRB- in London -RRB- .
We kept on organizing literary seminars every fortnight in London .
Although the grand session of the All India Progressive Writers ` Association happened in April 1936 in Lucknow . ` .
Whether to consider Mulk Raj Anand ` s thing or the current president Punilan ` s , or other writers who are insistent to prove the Progressive Writers ` Association to be founded on April 10 , 1936 .
What exactly is the reason about this that such a confusing situation has become of such a little thi ?
Actually , it is connected to the first question raised above , that whether Premchand was a communist or n ?
It is obvious that those who founded the Progressive Writers Association in London , most of them were Indian writers and authors who studied in England .
They were mostly communists and I should also indicate that most of them were Abhijan meaning elite .
By the late 1930s , Premchand had become an undisputed great name among Indian authors especially among the Hindi and Urdu readers .
Premchand getting associated with the founding of the Progressive Writers Association was like getting a good reputation for the organization .
Hence Premchand who presided over the Lucknow session was popularized as the founder of the Progressive Writers Association .
Progressive Writers Association was directly associated with the Communist Party .
Thus Premchand also headed the General Assembly of the Writers Union -LRB- who was later established as the founder of the Writers ` Association by some -RRB- , his being a communist also became necessary .
Then the efforts began to prove Premchand as a communist based on a few of the articles and citations .
Truely Premchand admired the Bolshevik Revolution from the beginning .
Afterall the suffering communities and farmers Premchand and favored meets the ideology of communism and the Bolshevik Revolution .
But Premchand never declared himself as a communist .
Nor was the echoes of the violent Bolshevik Revolution found in his literature .
The message of non-violence and disdain of a bloody revolution , which took him closer to Baba Gandhi and not Marx .
Declaring Premchand a communist is the same as separating Jawaharlal Nehru from Gandhi and putting on a red badge on him .
At the initiative of the Communist Party of India All India Student Federation was formed in 1936 , which was inaugurated by Nehru .
Gandhi , Rabindranath Tagore , Tej Bahadur Sapru , Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan etc . gave the messages and Govindvallabh Pant was included in the speakers .
Now the initiative was of the Communist Party , but who was a communist in the names which were enumerated right n ?
Premchand chaired the session of the Progressive Writers Association in the same way as Jawaharlal Nehru inaugurated the All India Students ` Federation conference .
According to this Nehru and others including Govindballabh Pant should also be declared communis ?
In order to prove Premchand a communist time and again his article ` Mahajani Sabhyata ` is referred to .
Premchand definitely praised ` Nayi sabhyata ka surya sudur paschim se uday ` .
This was the time when a ray of hope appeared suddenly after World War I , in which the shackles of favor , exploitation , slavery seemed to break away .
This new light started getting into the hearts of all those people who were against the exploitative feudal regime and who were exploited themselves .
Why would the society devoid of exploitation not get a more appreciated status in their eyes .
That new , emerging leadership made him hopeful too , he did not even know what communism was .
For them everything was just freedom from hunger .
Premchand said , `` Blessed is that civilization , which is ending richness and personal property and sooner or later the world would definitely follow it , this civilization does not match the social composition or religion of this country or is not suitable for that environment , this argument is absolutely irrelevant `` .
Very correctly said by the master of novel .
This exactly should be expected from a great storyteller .
And the system should also be like this .
To free from hunger and slavery .
But will this be enough to prove Premchand a communi ?
So for him , the main issue is freedom from exploitation , banking and refuge .
But he praises even religions , in the same breath .
This also implies that if freedom from from exploitation , banking and refuge is received from religions like Christianity or Buddhism , they are also entitled of the same respect .
Premchand himself was the follower of various Hindu traditions in private life .
The truth is that novels like Premshram , Sevasadan and numerous stories take him towards Gandhiji , not towards communism .
In the session of Progressive Writers Association in 1936 a personality like Maulana Hasrat Mohani on one side talked about the promotion of Communist ideas , while Premchand did not once in his speech made any such statement .
Can anyone tell its reas ?
It is appropriate for us that Premchand remains a great storyteller .
` ` Literature will always be a flame that stays in the forefront of a society `` , for this Premchand does not have to be a communist .
Our friend of last fifty-seven-years Ashok Bajpai -LRB- ` Kabhi-Kabaar ` , Jansatta , June 9 -RRB- has started the beginning of `` A Century of Nobel Prize ` from a well known myth .
The Nobel Prize for literature is given to a specific writer for his overall creative contribution to prize languages , even though some of his best works are mentioned in the commendation speech .
In the official statement given by the Swedish Academy Nobel committee on Rabindranath Tagore although the central importance was given to ` Gitanjali ` , ` The Gardener ` , ` Lyrics of Love and Life ` , ` Glimpses of Bengal Life ` , ` The Crescent Moon ` and ` Sadhana : the Realization of Life ` were also mentioned .
Since last year only I was in the search of some facts about this 1913 award and in the National Library in Tallinn , of which luckily I am a reading member , I found the rare annual ` brochures ` of the Swedish Academy in which the committee members , their decision , the biographies and speeches of the winners were published .
The original souvenir-books of the last 112 years are probably not available in India .
A one-liner and sometimes less than that declaration of the reason why the awards of the year is given to who and why is published in them in the respective year .
Regarding Thakur , in the crude Hindi translation of the original French it is said : ` ` That deep and sublime inspiration , for that beauty and originality , his talent was able to the introduce that to English dominated Western Literature `` .
It is noteworthy that the Swedish Academy is saying that Thakur introduced the West to its own talent in English ` form ` not in translation .
Thakur is also seen considering his ` Gitanjali ` , on the basis of whose fame and popularity he was given the Nobel Prize , as his original English work .
There is a lot and a very important difference between that ` Gitanjali ` and the alleged original Bengali ` Geetanjli ` .
Perhaps there have been amendments in the two in the poet ` s lifetime only .
There is a strange fact that Thakur did not himself go to Sweden to take the award .
The small speech which is given during the award dinner , in the place of that he sent a one line telegram to the Academy in English , which was read out to the dignitaries present by Sarge Fairs -LRB- Ambassador charge -RRB- in the British Embassy in Sweden .
In the absence of Thakur Clive accepted his award .
Even more strange incident is that Tagore did not send the Nobel - acceptance speech in writing so that any judge or officer of the Academy could read it on that historic occasion .
In recent years , the known Austrian novelist - poet - playwright Elfriede Jelinek , who has a phobia of staying or speaking in a crowded place , sent her Nobel speech in video and that only was shown and played .
It is very rare that this publication of the Swedish Academy does not anywhere give a reason why Thakur did not reach Stockholm to experience such an immortal moment , to give an excellent speech .
As a result , Honorary Professor Dr . Harald Hyarne , the chairman of the Nobel Committee , gave Thakur a relatively long speech .
It is sad that Edward Sayeed did not see this speech , otherwise he would have atleast mentioned it in his ` Orientalism ` , which is not a very satisfactory book , but still .
This presidential speech is full of such improperness , myths and ill-effects that a book could be written on it .
I do not know whether there is a Bangla translation of it and what is the response of Bengali or not that translates into Bengali writers and their shonar ` s response , but in this century - year should have brought him in Hindi .
The first is that Thakur was declared as an ` Anglo - Indian Poet ` statutorily in it , ` Gitanjali ` was boldly considered as ` A Collection of Religious Poems ` , it has also been made as the ` hedge belonged to the English Literature ` .
It has been said about Thakur that he `` is the new and admirable master of that poetry which has been an unfailing consort in spreading the British civilization in the age of Queen Elizabeth `` .
The entire credit for India ` s renaissance , in which the rise and development of modern Indian languages is also included , has been given to the Christian missionaries in the speech , whose partial contribution can not be ruled out either .
The Bhakti movement has also not said to be unaffected by the West ` s foreign religions .
A bigger claim than this has been done for ` Brahmo Samaj ` .
No efforts have been spared to represent Thakur as affected by all this , infact a ` product ` of this - a saint , philosopher , religious person , almost like a prophet .
It is difficult to know whether or not Thakur had knowledge of this previously written statement , or was it influenced by his absence .
Later , what was his reaction on this , this could also not be known .
Later on even Yeats turned as Thakur ` s adversary and in 1935 once even said : `` Let Tagore go to hell `` .
We -LRB- Sturge Moore and I -RRB- took out his three good books and then he thought more important than being a great poet is knowing English and he started publishing sentiments filled garbage and ruined his reputation .
Tagore does not know English , no Indian knows English . ` .
Philip Larkin ruined Thakur ` s name to ` Ravindram ` and even called out a few vulgar words .
They are also poets like Kapil Sibal and Narendra Modi .
Let these early elections get over ??
The serious issue today is that leaving Bengali readers nobody , like me , reads or wants to read Thakur .
His reputation in the world literature is historical , not living .
I have shamelessly and with cheeky audacity has said that for me Namdeo Dhasal is more relevant than Thakur in present India , whose poetry and dubious political conduct atleast develops a sharp debate .
In this century , a few books of his have sure been published to capitalize on the opportunity but in very limited editions .
It is sometimes heard in France that since a substitute has been found in Hindi , people have forgotten Thakur , although for example it has not come up in Titinagar .
However , the fact that the coessential of Thakur , poet Gibran Khalil is still bought and read thousand times more than him - although nobody takes Gibran and Thakur seriously today in the areas of relevant and real literature .
There is a curious coincidence that this year is Gibran ` s 130th anniversary and the 90th anniversary of his ` prose poem ` masterpiece ` The Prophet ` whose translations and millions of copies have been sold , which is still called the second best-selling book in the world after Shakespeare .
I ` m pretty sure that many of them would not have read Tagore , neither would want to read .
It ` s a different thing if he is a part of an elaborate lobbying for India ` s second Nobel Prize , then maybe the organizer , or Kunwar Narayan or Sachidanand , or some other candidate gets it himself .
Although like some other foolish Hindi optimists I also think that if someone does get it , it would be Manglesh Dabral , which also depends on what role does Ashok play in World-Poetry-Conference , in Shrikanji ` s tone he gives also or not .
Will he not be allowed to read the translations of the guests or to enter in poetry sessio ?
Vishnu Khare ` s article `` The risks of regarding Ravindra Nobel century like this `` -LRB- 16 June -RRB- is indecorous , unbalanced and unrestrained and also full of frivolity and frustration .
Although the motive of this frustative article was to jeopardize the proposed World Poetry Event organised by Ashok Vajpayee at its initial stage only .
But its motive is to take care of some other people also .
Firstly , with young writer Vyomesh Shukla .
Then the senior Manglesh Dabral .
Although all this is not unexpected from Khare .
But the most imbalance and inordinately is seen there where he -LRB- Khare -RRB- tries to undervalue Rabindranath Tagore .
However , it is also not the first time when he is into this kind of a sickening campaign against an eminent Indian writer .
Ageya , Ram Vilas Sharma and MF Husain has been on his radar too .
Of course , these are the reasons that Khare ` s weight and importance in the contemporary Hindi criticism and art - culture discourse diminished .
His reputation that was made as a good poet , it gradually became blurred -LRB- which distresses a lot of people and me too -RRB- and he became notorious in the world of literature as a frustrated Durvasa .
It is required to save the literary discourse from the minds of such frustrated Durvasas , because like Thakur has written ` however small the thorn is , it is capable of piercing ` .
The way that Vishnu Khare has made a failed attempt to defame Rabindranath Tagore , it looks as if he is beginning to get a little far-fetched .
And he got this far-fetched aim in Estonia ` s capital Tallinn , where diving at the National Library he found that Rabindranath won the Nobel Prize for introducing his talent in English form .
To be more vocal , Swedish Akademy considered ` Gitanjali ` an original creation of English , not of Bengali .
Khare from his side has put the fact in the category of strangeness that Rabindranath did not go to Sweden to collect the Nobel Prize , neither did he send any written message on his behalf .
Ideally , the conclusion of this is that Thakur was not too excited regarding the Nobel prize .
But whose name has Khare , how can he reach to such a simple and intuitive conclusi ?
Then the case that W B Yeats worked so hard to get Thakur the Nobel Prize , and later the same Yeats became his rival , and started mocking his knowledge of English .
The campaign to defame Rabindranath did not stop here .
While referring to Khalil Gibran it was said that his works were bought and read thousands of times more than Rabindranath .
Although Khare did not spare Gibran also .
He said that he too like Rabindranath Tagore is not taken seriously in relevant and real literature .
It is not to be said that Khare has become a master of literature .
Could give a fatwa any time .
Is it not enough to be a vivid poet in your own langua ?
If you leave out medieval poets like Tukaram , Kabir , Tulsi , then not just in the modern Indian languages , who is a poet in any of the world ` s languages who is not immersed in the culture of his language as was Rabindranath Tagore in Bengali .
And which modern western or eastern writer has bigger contribution in the fields like novel , story , drama , music , arts , education , as much as of Rabindrana ?
As far as the question of Rabindranath Tagore being relevant in world literature , Khare must remember Pablo Neruda .
Neruda is counted among the admired poets of the world today .
Khare has taken out an ideation point out from Neruda .
Now Neruda has become relevant on the world level and Rabindranath irrelevant .
The style of Khare is that he presents loads of facts when writing about someone and pretends that he knows a lot of stuff that others do not .
If I remember T S Eliot , then this is the same matter as one remembering laundry bills while writing about Shakespeare .
But how does it help in understanding Shakespeare ` s to know this thing that how much does the playwright spend on his laund ?
Khare also while writing about authors refers to laundry bills and think that he has unobtainable information .
However , one more information at the request of this gentleman who loves information .
During the Second World War , when the dark clouds of Nazism was getting over Poland in 1939 , then a children ` s literature writer named Janus Korchak had played Rabindranath ` s play ` Dakghar ` with the children of an orphanage .
This was not any routine play .
This was an unforgettable chapter of the courage and determination of a cultural activist against Nazism .
It was the time when the children of the orphanage were to be sent to the Nazi ghetto camp .
Korchak gave yet another example of amazing courage at that time .
He had the option of not going in the ghetto camp with the kids .
For Khare ` s information this should also be told to him that ` Dakghar ` was written in 1912 and before being staged in India it was staged in London in English by the Irish theater .
Its French translation was done by Andre Jid and was also broadcasted on the French radio .
As far as the Indian languages are concerned , perhaps no Indian author is read more than Thakur .
Last week , dramatized forms of stories by Rabindranath Tagore were staged on the Indian theater , which will yield startling conclusion if these were to be counted .
Veteran stage artist - author Bhanu Bharti wrote an original play in Hindi based on ` Muktadhara ` -LRB- a famous drama of Thakur -RRB- , which was staged and much discussed later .
Sunil Shanbhag also wrote a play in Hindi on Rabindranath ` s ` Dakghar ` Poland episode .
It is not that the staging of the works of Rabindranath happened just on the occasion of his one-fiftieth anniversary .
Before this as well senior directors like B V Karanth , Ram Gopal Bajaj and Anuradha Kapoor have been staging his compositions and have been giving new interpretations .
If this is not the relevance of a writer , then what else ?
As far as I know , the plays of Thakur would have been staged more in numbers in Indian languages -LRB- and perhaps even abroad -RRB- , if the administration of Shantiniketan -LRB- which had the copyrights of the works of Rabindranath -RRB- would have shown the graciousness of giving the permission to the directors to stage and perform .
Gulzar is just one name , but his work are numerous .
What should you refer to him ?
