In 1974 , Erikjekins had made the record by cultivating 168 kilograms potato by a plant which still subsists .
Very tempting smell comes from some of the varieties of the potatoes .
Potato is the main food in the whole Europe .
In India at Shimla , the Central potato foundation has played its role in the potato revolution by developing almost 45 varieties of the Khuphari quality .
Looking at the importance of the potato , United Nation had declared the year 2008 as ` Potato year ` .
In the World Potato is cultivated in the 125 countries .
Today worldwide there is almost 5000 varieties of the potatoes which grow mostly in the Andes mountains .
A good thing is this that all these varieties are preserved in the genetic bank of the central potato foundation .
Outlay to run all the welfare schemes for farmers has been prepared to cultivate potatoes by the agriculture and horticulture department of the related states .
States like Rajastan have even applied it .
97 percent potatoes are cultivated in India in just 10 states .
In this almost 33.12 percent potato is cultivated in UP .
Potatoes are cultivated in all the districts of the Uttar Pradesh but most of the potatoes are cultivated in the Pharukhabad , Agra , Eta , Mainpuri , Phirojabad and neighborhoods .
This whole area is famous as the name of the potato belt .
Farmers of this place have got the all prizes of the national level in the production of the potatoes .
After this West Bengal comes at the second position .
According to government data in the year 2012-13 there is estimation of the almost 10 percent rise in the productivity of the whole India .
Indian potatoes are being exported in Shrilanka , Barma , Bhutan and Nepal .
Among these countries almost 15 percent potatoes cultivated in India are exported .
This year preparation of the potato exportation has been done in the new way .
Except Uttar Pradesh traders of the Punjab , Gujarat , Bihar , Andhra Pradesh and Rajasthan have been also contacted by the society .
According to Sudhir Kumar national president of the Potato Grower and Export Society , varieties of the 3797 , Kuphari Bahara , Chipsona Kuphari and Pukharaja will be included in the potatoes which are exported .
These varieties are the main varieties of the Uttar Pradesh .
Due to cultivation of potatoes at the broad level and due to the way open for the potatoes exportation , from the farmers ` side it is being tried to open the Potato Cenetary Lab at the district level .
Actually in the potato exportation disease free certificate becomes the hurdle .
Potato cenetary lab established in capitals of different states propagates it .
For every farmer it is problematic to reach there .
In this condition it will be convenient for farmers if the lab will be open at the district level .
To attract farmers toward the potato cultivation Micro-irrigation Scheme is being run in different states by the central government .
Farmers are being motivated to cultivate more than before by giving some extra rebates by state governments .
The Uttar Pradesh government has cut down involvement of the farmers by 30 percent in the National Mission on the Micro-Irrigation scheme -LRB- NMMI -RRB- .
From this , farmers will be much relieved .
A paper related to the rise in the share of the states in the project has been propagated by the Uttar Pradesh government Secretary Dr . Rajanish Dube on the behalf of state governments .
A farmer of the Bihar from the Nalanda district who does farming organically made the world record by producing 108.8 ton potatoes in a hectare .
Last year in the Nalanda itself at the Darveshpura a farmer Nitish Kumar had made the record of the 729 quintal production of the potatoes in a hectare .
Farmers of the West Bengal have contracted with a company which makes cold drinks to cultivate the Atlanta variety of the potato .
This variety of the potatoes are used to make the chips .
In the Brahmaputra , mainly attention is given to the cultivation of potatoes .
Due to the good price of the potato farmers have got good benefits .
After cultivation of the potatoes they cultivate wheat , onion and others .
In such conditions small farmers take double benefit cultivating two crops in a season .
On the national level paddy is cultivated in almost 4.5 crore hectare .
Due to rise in the sowing area the production of rice -LRB- Including the production of rabi and kharif both -RRB- in the year 2011-12 -LRB- July-June -RRB- according to agricultural ministry there is anticipation to reach 102 million ton record level .
In the expectation of the record production of the rice , agriculture ministry had estimated the goal of the government purchasing of the rice in 2011-12 -LRB- October-September -RRB- 35.3 million tons .
Before that during September 2011 government agency -LRB- FCI -RRB- had purchased 33 million tons rice .
Before that in the year 2007-08 maximum production of the rice was 9.5 crore tons and productivity of the rice was 21 quintal per hectare .
Hence this was the reason that agriculture scientist to increase the production of the rice adopted the system of rice intensification -LRB- SIR -RRB- technology which role was pivotal .
Every person assumes that rice is an aquatic crop and grows better in stable water .
Whereas the fact is this that paddy certainly retains alive in water but this is not an aquatic crop and does not grow in the lack of the oxygen .
Paddy plant invests much of its energy to develop the air repertory in its roots that ` s why SRS technology is being successful .
From the different experiment it has been proved that under the SRI cultivation paddy does not submerge but during the vegetative period it keeps the soil moist , later water density of the one inch is enough whereas in SRI technology there is need of half water in comparison to general condition .
In SRI there is the need of very less water and less expenses and even production is good .
If we pay attention to the history of the SRI technology -LRB- SRI -RRB- then in the year 1983 in Madagascar this technology has been developed for the first time .
Testing of its potentiality was done in China , Indonesia , Cambodia , Thailend , Bangladesh , Shrilanka and India .
In Andhra Pradesh in the year 2003 during the Kharif crop SRI was tested in 22 districts of the state .
The formal use of paddy cultivation from this technology was started from 2002-2003 .
The specialty of this technique is that in this only two kilograms paddy seeds are enough for an Acre farm .
In this , less quantity of seeds is used whereas on the other side time to prepare nursery saves .
With the adoption of System of Intensification -LRB- SRI -RRB- technique more skillful use of the soil , labor , timing and other resources have been found for more production from the per unit area .
In this technique soil is kept just moist after transplantation of plants .
In the farm water clog is not kept .
Drainage is arranged properly due to that moisture will retain during the growth and development of plants .
Thus soil remains in pneumatic conditions in the paddy farms and there is less loss of the nitrogen fertilizer which is given in the soil through the denitrification process .
Simultaneously , excretion of nitrogen oxide is negligible from the paddy farms .
There is also saving of almost 30-50 percent irrigation water when the paddy is cultivated by SRI techniques .
The main aspect of this technique is environment reformation .
Due to the better use of natural resources and less use of other products like fertilizer and insecticide this technique is ecofriendly because in this technique water does not stand in the farm , because of that formation of the gases like methane and nitrous oxide do not occur and biodiversity of the land also increases .
From the SRI techniques in the paddy cultivation there is need of seeds from the rate of 2 kilograms per acre and some plants by the rate of 25-25 centimeter area per unit .
In the SRI technique paddy plant grows properly in the natural condition and the root of that also grows widely .
This gets the nutrients for itself from the deep layers of the soil .
This technique retains immunity against agricultural pests because this helps paddy crops to absorb nutrients from the soil naturally .
In general technique more than 30 buds per plant are got , whereas more than 100 buds could be emerged from the transplantation of the paddy through SRI techniques .
Varieties of the hybrid paddy or normal paddy could be also cultivated through the SRI techniques .
According to the region specific climate , it is mandatory to select the varieties of the hybrid paddy .
For sowing every year the new seeds of the hybrid paddy should be got from the reliable and authorized seed distributor .
For the Jharkhand state pro agro6444 variety of the hybrid paddy has been sanctioned by the Birsa Agriculture University .
In May-June after the first rain , make the farm which has been selected for nursery by using leveler .
The nursery is prepared in the dry or moist farm .
Growth in the moist farm is good .
Wet seed in water for 12 hours and before sowing in nursery medicate seed by putting quantity of 2 gram carbondaizim fungicide in per kilogram of the seed then sow it .
If the nursery has to be prepared in the moist farm then spread medicated seeds on the plain tough ground in the shadow and cover it by the wet jute bags .
Sprinkle water over jute bags 2-3 times in a day .
Seed will be sprouted after 24 hours .
Then spread sprouted seeds in the moist farm .
After 2-3 days of the sowing of the germinated seeds do the irrigation in the nursery .
After that as per need do little irrigation .
Keep nursery free from the weeds .
Cultivation of the hybrid paddy could be done in watered or unwatered land .
After first rain in May while plowing and before a month from the transplanting put rotten fertilizer of the dung or compost by the rate of 5 tons per hectare .
15 days before transplantation water the farm or till it so that weeds will decay and mix into the soil .
Before a day from plantation till it again and make the farm plain and do the plantation .
After using leveler do the transplantation in the shallow depth of 2-3 centimeter in the soil of the farm which has been leveled .
If there will be water clog then drain the water before plantation .
Before plantation use the chemical fertilizer .
Keep the rows in the north-south direction .
In the farm after draining the water put the one fourth quantity of the nitrogen and potash and all phosphorus .
Divide three fourth quantity of nitrogen into three parts .
Put first portion after 3 and 6 weeks of the plantation and rest at the time when the buds come out .
Remaining one fourth portion of the potash topdress into standing crop at the time of the budding .
Despite that use DAP 25 kilo per hectare salphor while preparing farm itself .
Due to the absence of the stable water more grass grows among the SRI plants .
Grass should be removed by moving weeder among plants .
Grasses near the plant should be removed from the hands .
Microbial activity increases by letting the farm dry gradually and watering it and plants get nutrients easily .
To prevent from the fungoid wind and brown spot diseases spry 0.5 percent of the cabredazim vevistin 50 or 0.06 percent of the trisayclazol .
For bacterial diseases drain water from the farm .
When 80 percent grains of the capitulum ripe then harvest the crop .
When two small leaves start to appear in the paddy plant after 8 to 12 days then transplantation should be down .
While transplantation , reduce the retrograde .
Carefully extract the small paddy plant with the seed of the nursery , soil and roots and plant it at shallow depth .
The paddy plant grows better alone rather than in the group .
That ` s why it should be planted in the square at the distance of 25 centimeters .
Due to this there is the possibility of more root growth .
Two weeding must be done till the eruption or inflorescence of the paddy , but 4 times weeding is assumed better .
More yielding is possible from better fertility and balanced nutrients .
Development of the country has gone on the path after independence , in fact those were the way of the indiscriminate exploitation of the natural resources .
How much we have tortured the nature that its sullenness came out the form of the all environmental problems .
We have increased the destruction of resources till the extent , which must have reached to extreme .
One side population is growing whereas on the other side acreage of agriculture land is decreasing .
The economy and population are growing explosively on the price of natural resources .
Our current systems remain sustainable not just today but in the future also , for this preservation of the natural resources is most important .
It seems today base of our agricultural system has started to slide - climate change , crumbling land-resources and ruined natural resources - our agriculture has been remaining based on these itself .
The risk hovering over the head of the bio-material resources of this earth , this is the doings of men itself , there is no doubt about this .
With the growth of the population the demand of the foodstuffs will be doubled .
According to the anticipation of the United Nation there is the fear of almost 35 percent less production of the foodstuffs by 2050 due to climate change , reduction of the agricultural land , water crises , etc .
Due to use of agricultural land for the industrial growth and residence scheme agricultural land has been reduced by almost two percent during last two decades .
Through the provisions the policy of the more production in less acreage should be adopted .
For the time being the one portion of our food production is the result of the non sustainable use of the land and water and if it will not be reformed then a time will come when food production rather than increasing will start to decrease .
Sustainable resource arrangement is not difficult , providing we give priority to the issues like to reduce soil and water wastage in the future research policies , to remove regional imbalances in productivity and environmental crisis .
In the year 2025 , our food needs have been estimated at 30 million tons .
Meaning of to complete this is that to maintain the 4 percent growth rate in the agriculture production every year , which is not that easy .
To maintain the current level of the food self-sufficiency also , we will have to ensure that 50 million tons foodstuffs should increase every year .
Since when the door of the more production was opened in the development of the dwarf varieties , from then to cross their genetic productivity limit scientists are engrossed to bring out new techniques to form the more useful plant from the scientific creative perspective and to use the possibilities of the hybrid energy .
Between these two options , the latter one has been proved more practical , especially when China has proven the techniques of hybrid paddy successful at the professional level .
Taking lessons from this experience of China India ran a huge program to develop the hybrid paddy in the year 1989 according to the nation ` s situations .
This is the matter of pleasure that international organization like ` Simit ` famous for the research in the wheat and maize is taking interest in the hybrid wheat and maize technology .
India had taken initiative in the world to develop hybrid varieties in the cotton , millet and castor and by taking motivation from that achievement Indian agriculture research institute wants to cultivate the new varieties of such hybrids which could face the new circumstances firmly .
For this except paddy attention is also being paid to the crops like mustard , rapeseed , yellow lentils and safflower .
If In the varieties and hybrids the necessary level of the resistivity would be given and techniques of the consolidated pest control would be adopted then loss of the production may be reduced till some extent .
Due to the imbalance and less use of the nutrients , selecting inappropriate varieties and cheap seeds yielding suffers loss .
To make the agricultural product sustainable we have taken several strong steps , but still there is a huge scope of the utilization of the nation ` s vast agricultural potential .
Every kind of the climate is here .
In the east the rainiest areas in the world and in the west the driest area .
Like this even soils are of the different varieties .
It seems like the weather has been made according to the need of crops .
Such a vast bio-diversity is here that India is included among the centers of the emergence of the flora .
The 12 percent of the world ` s flower-heritage has been treasured on our earth and tree-plants of the 45000 varieties are our green golden mine .
Among these 5000 varieties are used for food , fuel , medicine , fiber and spices etc .
Like flora India is full of the genetic diversity of the fauna also and there is a vast scope of its utility , this has been proved .
In future agriculture will have to bare the challenges on the world level like ecology , climate , economic , social , equality and law and energy and employment .
For this there will be need of the innovations , development of the first class technology and to convert them into quality products after publishing it , which could confront the world-competition and by getting maximum benefit could rise up the lifestyle level of the people engaged in the agriculture .
Globalization has open up the world market .
In the world-competition that product will be sold out , which will be better than others .
Thus now the quality of our product is also equally essential as productivity .
After the use of the corps and hybrids which give more grain , the competition of more productivity and benefits has increased as such that our attention did not go to this issue that how long this process will be able to run .
There is the result of this that these processes have already given away and new problems to reduce the productivity standard started to come out .
Few problems of such kinds are these - lack in efficiency of the nutrients , imbalance of the many nutrients in the soil , adverse changes in the physical and chemical nature of the soil , misuse of the water , soil and water pollution and collusion of the insect disease and weeds .
Our most popular and productive area of the wheat-paddy crop process is an example of this thing that when the danger of the sustainability occurs and rein of the production stops then how ridiculous problem emerges .
In the crop cycle of the high price crops sunflower , soya bean , peanuts , mustard and basamati rice etc . have been included .
Like this looking at the productivity and sustainability of the agriculture integrated nutrient management and integrated pest management technology is being used mostly .
If the maximum scope of the irrigation will be embodied then too , 50 percent of the agriculture land will be dry land .
That ` s why if we have to save the farmers from the insecure farming of the dry region then will have to give new direction to the research to develop the technology according to the changing tenor of the weather , then only stability could be brought in the food production .
For all these there is the need of the continuous practice .
Till fertilizers are concerned , techniques of its appropriate usage have been developed .
The importance of the contribution of the pulses in the Indian agriculture is popular .
This is the main and a cheap source of the protein in the veg food .
In these there is 2-3 times more protein than grains like wheat , maize , barley , rice and millet .
In our vegetarian food most of the quantity of the protein is fulfilled by the pulses itself .
The main hurdle to increase the productivity of the pulses are - adverse weather , research gap , abnormal soil , organic cause , lack of improved varieties and authenticated seeds , crops actions -LRB- early sowing , low seed quantity , insufficient irrigation , weeding-removing , inadequate usage of the fertilizer -RRB- , not giving Rhizobium vaccination , lack in the plant ` s preservation , lack of broadcasting and training and lack of the proper government policies , etc .
These crops increase the fertility of the land by establishing the atmosphere ` s nitrogen in the land .
The deep roots of these crops reform the soil composition .
Pulse crops like cowpea , moth bean and kidney bean are used as a green fertilizer .
Capacity to bear the dryness these crops can be cultivated in the dry areas successfully .
Pulse crops have more risk than other cultivated crops .
Hence to increase the cultivation of these crops Pulse Insurance Policy should be launched and this scheme should be made popular .
Government should arrange the pulses ` proper marketing services to make available to the farmers .
Despite that a proper arrangement should be done to make farmers give right price .
During passed ten year overview of the growth of the production and productivity of the oil seed crops mainly rain dependent , a proper reduction in the import and eight fold growth in the export is a perfect example of the yellow revolution in the nation .
New varieties of the different oil seed pulses will have to be developed for the salinity soils and according to dry cultivation .
Integrated plant protection and integrated plant nutrition policy will be mandatory to maintain the growth rate of the oil seeds .
Seeds of the improved quality will have to be made in the maximum quantity and it will have to make available to the farmers in the time .
The varieties in those hybrid qualities are available , the utmost attention will have to be given on their seed production .
In the barren land many plants like Mahua , Neem will have to be planted , so that maximum production could be done .
For this it will be necessary that coordination and uniformity could be established among different departments of the center and states .
In the integrated complete development system proper industry-business will have to be brought with the oilseed crops .
This is mandatory because the oil of the oil seed crops , bran with protein and fibers of many crops and there are many other such things without integrated and inclusive development of those things the complete growth of the oil seeds will not be possible .
To maintain the yellow revolution always and to make it reach to new heights , will have to run a time-bound research program .
Horticultural crops are crops which need more labor but simultaneously are the crops which give more benefits and are ecofriendly .
Horticultural import is growing gradually .
The storage capacity at the International Airports will have to increase .
The research efforts have given good results in the grapes , tomato , potato and sweet potatoes .
Generally different varieties are used for the fresh and preserved .
There is the need of the encouragement in the field like food preservation and greenhouse production .
From this with the growth in the employment opportunity the contribution in economy reliability and stability will also increase .
By producing dense yielding through ` green House ` , the other crops could be cultivated in the rest agriculture land .
For the maintenance of the balanced diet and health , vegetables are mandatory .
Looking at the deterrence against the diseases number of the vegetarian people are growing steadily and demand of the vegetables is increasing .
In India , 160 new varieties have been recommended for cultivation at the national level .
Despite that there is an important place of the hybrid varieties in the vegetables which have better yielding than other varieties .
Despite that , new techniques to cultivate the vegetables have been developed , by adopting those farmers could earn more increasing the vegetable productivity .
In fact , there is an importance of the perfect weather timing to sow the every crop .
The meaning of this timing is to make available proper temperature , oxygen , humidity etc . in right amount so that germination of the sowed seeds could be normal and desired because proper germination of the crop is assumed as the base of the production .
Completion of the crop ` s life cycle is possible by the timely sowing .
The crop which is sown timely gets the length of the sun-air velocity-day through proper temperature , humidity , rain or irrigation .
From this growing and developing process of the plant starts at the right time and run with right pace and condition of the plant remains good .
Although sowing time in every weather has its own importance but the time of the sowing has very deep impact over the productivity of the crops .
It has been seen even that difference comes between the crop sown before noon or afternoon .
It will be right to say this that the key of getting proper production of the crops is timely sowing .
Grains especially cluster bean , millet and Armillary are grown whole year in some of the parts of the country but their maximum sowing is done during rainy weather .
Hence timing of the sowing has a great impact over their production .
It is assumed useful in many perspectives to sow all the crops in the row .
But it is necessary to say in the context of the coarse grains that coarse grains remain untouched from the scientific techniques .
Sprinkling sowing : in this process seeds are sown by scattering .
Work of sowing is done either before the last tillage or after the tillage .
If seeds have been sown after the tillage the it is must to add a little borax so that the seed will be connected to the moisture of the soil and gemination would be good .
Sometime coarse grains are scattered in the moist soil and even tillage is not done but this process of the sprinkling sowing can not be said good .
The equal distribution of the seed is the must .
In this process it is not possible to have equality in the seed distribution .
Sowing in the row : in this process seed is sown in the row of the uniform and optimal distance .
There is just a single benefit of this method that rows remain in the equal distance , but even seed would be felt by Keira or Pora method , it can not be distributed equally .
There is also the need of the optimum distance among the rows and plants .
Simultaneously , this is also not less important that the impact of the direct sowing or transplantation over the production of the coarse grains is an important field of the loss-gain testing .
Almost all coarse grains are the important crops of the dry farming or dry areas and their sowing could be done by putting seeds directly , if plants of the millet or made are transplanted then there is likely to increase in yielding .
The area of coarse grains is not less , even though proper attention could not be given to their cropping-methods .
In this method there is its own importance of the sowing timing .
Dry land cluster bean : the right timing of the sowing in the temperate climate depends on the temperature and the soil moisture but in our country in the areas these cereal crops are sown in which the available moisture present in the soil is more important in comparison to the temperature .
It will not be unfair to say this that it will not be right to sow even there is good temperature but lack of the soil moisture because germination of the seed will be impossible in the lack of the soil moisture .
Hence it is an established fact that the sowing time of these areas depends on the moisture found in the soil .
For best germination and better growth of the cluster bean , at the sowing time , 70-80 F temperature is must in the optimum soil depth where cluster beans are sown .
Hence , sowing has been assumed useful in the presence of the optimum soil moisture .
There is the need of the Presence of the such moisture ` s amount in the heavy soil that land could be cultivated easily .
This moisture of the soil will be little less than the holding capacity , but in the light soil it will be proper to sow in the early moisture condition of the water holding capacity .
Often in our country sowing of the cluster bean depends on the rains to start .
Despite that there is impact of the whole life span of the variety and place over the sowing time .
Growth of the long term variety is generally with slow rate whereas short term variety grows quickly .
Hence sowing of the variety with long life span has to do early than the variety with the short life span .
In the southern area cluster bean is sown twice generally and sometimes its three crops are harvested .
This is the result of the weather adversity which is the precious gift of the nature because through this seed of the new varieties can be cultivated in more quantity in the least time .
The sowing of the Kharif cluster bean depends on the start of the monsoon .
If rain is started at the right time then work of the sowing is started at the right time .
From the study of the available research information and experiment it is known that generally after the 10-15 days of the start of the rain of the monsoon in the northern and central regions in the second fortnight of the July the work of the sowing is started .
In the method of the cultivation of the local varieties the enough attention is not paid to the sowing time .
There may be many reasons for this such as fertility of these varieties was less and instead of profession agriculture work was just a mean of livelihood .
If there was no production of grains due to some reasons then farmers used to get satisfied from the production of the fodder itself .
The problem of the insects and diseases was not such huge hence less attention was paid to this side .
Actually , much attention was paid to this aspect after the development of the varieties which give more production because advance cultivation costs more .
Hence to get the complete benefit from this it was assumed mandatory from the economic perspective to establish the mutual harmony among all the cultivation methods .
Under the All Indian Sorghum Reformation Scheme and PL 480 Scheme , many experiments were done in the different areas cultivating cluster bean .
Among these hybrid and local varieties of the sorghum were included .
The motivation of this research work was to get maximum production from the new varieties and simultaneously to develop the new methods to control the pests and main diseases .
Very important and useful results were got from the experiments done while sowing .
While interpreting the results of the experiments done under All Indian Cluster bean Reformation Scheme Singh -LRB- 1974 -RRB- mentioned that whatever experiments have been done from 1968 to 1973 , it clearly comes out from that the optimum timing to sow the Kharif cluster bean is after the rain of the monsoon starts .
This period is different in the dry areas and different parts of the country .
From the results of the experiments it comes to know that in the dry parts production of the cluster bean which was sown before the start of the monsoon was highest .
Production was reduced significantly when its sowing was done after three weeks from the rain began .
To know the best time to sow the cluster bean experiments were also done for three years -LRB- 1970-1972 -RRB- in the Indore center .
There was no significant difference in the production of the cluster beans sown in 23 or 30 June in 1970 , but production of the cluster beans sown on 7th July was less .
In fact , production of the cluster beans sown on 15th July reduced by 23.5-24 .0 quintal per hectare its mean such growth in the production could be done by the sowing on the time .
Like this maximum production got from the cluster beans shown on 22 June at 1971 .
Although fertility of the cluster beans sown on 29th June and 6th July was almost similar .
But the production of the cluster beans sown on 23rd July or 2nd August was very less .
Like this it is approved that the best time for the sowing of the cluster beans in the Indore region is 20-25 June , the fertility of the cluster beans sown in this period is high .
Hence at this time cluster bean must be shown at least in the irrigated areas .
To get the highest level of the productivity of the newly developed varieties it is beneficial to sow it in the first fortnight of the July .
From the perspective of to get the best time to sow the cluster bean many research has been done in the Indian Agriculture Research Institute .
This came to know from the results of these experiments that it is possible to get the commendable production from the cluster beans sown during the last week of the June or first week of the July .
From all the results this conclusion comes that it is possible to get more production by sowing the cluster seeds timely at least in irrigated areas .
But this question arises that eventually why is it not possible to sow the cluster beans in time or is there any arrangement through that cluster beans could be sown during the best period .
As for example if after leveling it would rain then there is a possibility of the late in the cultivation of the sorghum unwillingly even .
Sometimes it rains continuously for weeks or ten days and farm does not come in the condition to sow , it gets late in such condition .
The farmer should solve such problems by himself taking care of the experience of the local climate cycle .
In the south India it is a normal and popular method to take the ratoon of the cluster beans but this method is popular in the North India .
By the way it is also possible in this area to cultivate the ratoon of the cluster beans .
At this subject writer himself has done the experiments in the Indian Agricultural Research Institute .
The main objective of this experiment was to get green fodder in the beginning of July by sowing cluster beans in the summer weather in other words in the month of May-June .
Simultaneously this is also that possibility of the delay in the sowing of the irrigated cluster bean can be reduced .
After harvesting the wheat crop in May sowing of the cluster bean was done by using 17 kilo seeds per hectare .
Swarn and CSH-1 varieties had been chosen for this experiment .
Summer crop of the cluster bean had been harvested after almost 80 days of sowing for fodder .
Production of the fodder was 500 quintal per hectare .
This is the thing to pay attention that cluster bean had been harvested for fodder at the state of budding .
There were two reasons of it , one was this that healthy and more saplings would come out in the Peri sorghum , the second is this that the quantity of the hydrocynic acid should be at the determined secure level so that consumer animals should not have possibility to be harmed by this acid .
While cutting the fodder plant should be harvested at the height of the two or three inches from the ground .
By doing this crop of the Peri becomes good because in the remaining part number of the eyes are enough and germination of the saplings is satisfactory .
Growth and development rate of the Peri cluster bean was found much better than planted cluster bean .
Cluster beans sown simply , raise very slowly in the first month .
From that possibility of the attack of the pests and diseases is more because plants have less immunity against diseases etc .
During this period weeds also harm tremendously .
But crop of the Peri cluster bean covers the land completely after 15-20 days of the fodder harvesting in other words it grows quickly .
The result comes due to this that crop oppress weeds completely and they do not harm it significantly .
Likewise attack of the shoot flies is even negligible .
Hence crop of the Peri cluster bean is healthy for every aspect and number of the plants per hectare is optimum also .
Continuous raining also does not have bad impact over peri cluster bean because when times come fodder could be harvested even on the day of the raining .
There is certain possibility to cultivate the peri of the cluster beans in the North India and due to this production of the grain as well as fodder is significantly better .
But then there is the need to do more experiments now on this subject .
Actually , this is essential to know that which variety is better for especially cluster bean , peri .
In the variety , which have more gemination of the saplings from the lower part that variety is best to cultivate as peri .
Here it seems justifiable to inform that in some part of the North India peri of the cluster beans is being taken for fodder and till now no any example to harm the animals was found .
During summer period after one or two monsoon rains it has found safe to harvest it for fodder .
The summary is this that in the irrigated area , transplanting first crop of the cluster bean in the summer period fodder could be taken from the first crop and second crop could be kept for peri .
From that it is easy to reduce the instability of the weather and other bad effect .
Not just this , cluster bean could be left for the next crop at the best time so that maximum possible production of the irrigated cluster bean could be taken .
Before that the talk related to the best timing for sowing would be started this is essential to know that the cluster bean shown at the best time has not to face the lack of the moisture in the soil generally .
The results of the experiment show that if there is a lack of the moisture in the soil at the time of the budding then it gets bad effect over production of the grains .
If sowing of the crop is timely then possibility to come such condition becomes almost negligible .
The best timing to show is decided on the basis of the speculation of the weather expert scientist and own experiences .
The main objective of this method was to present as a beneficial solution to the delay in sowing due to continuous raining .
After being rained in comparison of the sowing it get the benefit of some time also .
From that it becomes possible to get the maximum production of the crop , but it is essential that there should be anticipation of the date of the raining .
This is not an easy work , even though after collecting figures of many decades related to the rain , their explanation has been done and still is being done .
On the basis of this description forecasting about the starting date of the monsoon raining could be done on the basis of the cycle .
On the basis of this information the timing to sow the cluster bean could be decided or is decided .
The map of the whole country rain is available but there is the need of the thing that this information would be reached out to farmers by the right way in the right form so that they may use this important information and could get the benefit by sowing at the approved time .
Due to availability of the irrigation resources approved best date or period could be pursued but at the matter of the cluster bean of the Kharif period it is not easy to follow this approval completely because uncertainty of the rain is equal in the both dry land irrigated areas .
The best period to sow the cluster bean in the Indore and other areas of such climate is the last weak of the June .
At this time by sowing cluster beans with the grains of the cluster bean production of the dry fodder are also better in comparison to the crop which is sown late .
this means that cluster bean which has been sown early has high vegetative growth .
In the climate of the Koimbtoure Kharif ` s cluster bean must be sown till third week of the July otherwise there is a heavy loss in its production .
Beside grains the production of the fodder also reduces .
But there is less impact over the production of the fodder in comparison to the grains .
Due to untimely especially delayed sowing the weight of the grains of the cluster bean and numbers of the ear grains reduces .
There is also a bad impact of the sowing time over Rabi cluster bean like Karif cluster bean .
In the Rabi weather cluster bean is transplanted in the Tamilnadu , Karnataka , Andhra Parades and Maharashtra .
Climate is such in these states that crop of the cluster bean could be cultivated whole year and it could be harvested three times in a year .
This is the gift of the nature .
There are many benefits of this like work to increase the seed is done in these parts itself .
New varieties of the seed could be produced in enough quantity in a year itself and could be reached to other parts of the country before the main weather starts .
Perhaps it might be known to you that due to this gift of the nature Crop Reformation schemes have had huge progress in the small time .
Example of this is the occurrence of the green revolution due to hybrid varieties of the cluster bean and millet and advance varieties of the wheat seeds .
In fact , the early sown cluster bean uses the stored moisture of the soil completely .
Likewise growth of the crop happens in the cycle that at every stage of the crop soil-water exists and crops become ready by ripening before the moisture of the soil lasts .
The results of the experiments show that production of the cluster bean could be increased by 80-81 percent sowing cluster bean before a month during the proper time .
Here an obvious question arises that why even knowing all these things its sowing is delayed .
Farmers sow the cotton on the start of the north-eastern monsoon because this is a more beneficial crop , when sowing of the cotton completes then chance to sow the cluster bean comes .
During this the best time of the sowing passes out .
Due to this the production of the Rabi cluster gets low .
Despite that for the Rabi weather advance varieties is also used less .
The combined impact of all these reasons reduces the yielding .
The area where just one crop of the cluster bean in a year is possible to take , in those area problem doesn ` t come to sow the cluster bean before a month or even before that .
But where cluster bean is sown during Kharif and Rabi both weathers , in those areas there is a possibility of the heavy loss due to stem borer fly .
Through early sowing it is possible to take more yielding .
The impact of the stem borer fly also could be lessened .
Simultaneously it is necessary to say that the amount and distribution of the rainfall have its own importance because there is the need of the enough moisture in the soil for the good yielding of the early cluster bean .
Beside moisture temperature and sunlight also have their own importance .
Actually after mid October it is not appropriate to show the Rabi cluster bean from the perspective of the production .
It came to know from the study done in the Bijapur that CSH-1 is the best for the early sowing and and CSB-7 and M-35-1 for the later sowing .
Likewise M-35-1 was proven good in the Belar for later sowing .
But at the Raychur and Rahoori center no significant difference was found in the yielding of the varieties .
In the southern plateau still Hagari and Maladani varieties of the cluster bean are popular because the impact of the stem borer fly is less over them and could resist properly the condition of the dryness .
But production of these varieties is less in comparison to new and advance varieties .
For the Rabi weather it is must to select proper varieties or to make the hybrid varieties which could give better production .
These varieties are almost free from the impact of the stem borer fly and posses the ability to tolerate maximum drought .
Like cluster bean there is a great impact of the sowing time over the yielding of the millet .
Perhaps you might be knowing that only three percent area of the cluster bean is irrigated .
Hence 97 percent area depends on the rain itself .
A good yielding may be achieved by bringing the significant change in the popular farming techniques .
It came to know from the results of the experiments which have been done till now that it is beneficial to sow the cluster bean before its popular sowing time because yielding of the hybrid cluster beans sown in time is more it means that its production capacity is high .
To get the maximum yielding from the hybrid cluster bean it should be shown in the mid of the July in the Hisar and the areas around it .
The best timing to sow the irrigated hybrid cluster bean is the first fortnight of the July .
The day sowing was done , if it would rain at the same day then cluster bean does not grow and it is called Panpit .
After Panpit either there is no accumulation or is very thin or less .
Thus the number of plants per unit remain quite less and production reduces heavily and if the sowing will be done again then it becomes a late crop .
With the purpose to solve these problems the sowing method of the cluster bean and direct sowing was compared in the Indian Agricultural Research Institute and other Agricultural universities .
Often paddy crop is enable to complete its life cycle in the lack of the water , while transplantation it is absolutely necessary to water fill in the farm and for direct sowing also there is the need of the farm to be wet .
Other side saplings of the millet could be sown in the mold and some heavy variety of the soil on the basis of their moisture holding capacity .
While transplanting sapling if it would rain for one or two times even then transplanted plants hold the root .
It is the writer ` s own experience that if rainfall comes till 5-6 days of the transplantation of the saplings then transplanted plants hold the root .
Despite that due to excess moisture in the night during the last week of the July and the month of the August dew drop falls , from that plants gets great help to hold the root .
Simultaneously transplantation could be done with the little change in the cultivation methods .
If the ridge and canals would be formed by plough then rain water could be prevented and sapling could be transplanted in the canals itself .
If monsoon rainfall does not start in the June last or the first week of the July then sapling of the cluster bean should be transplanted .
In the agricultural departments of the state collective sapling should be cultivated and on the need farmers should be made saplings available .
If due to some reason sapling would not be sold out then it is possible to use crop sown in the nursery in the form of the fodder .
Plants which suffer from the green leaf disease -LRB- Romal fungus or Dawny mildue -RRB- could be cropped while transplantation of the sapling and loss due to this disease could be reduced .
Due to preparation of the farm before transplantation of the sapling problem of the weeds resolves to some extent .
Before transplantation of the sapling it is also good to cut the upper portion of the plant ` s leaves but take care that growth point of the plant does not get hurt .
The main purpose of this method is to reduce the water loss due to evaporation .
While taking sapling out of the nursery it should be taken care that the roots do not be damaged hence before taking out sapling water should be enclosed in the sapling depot so that the soil would be wet and the roots of the plants will not be broken .
If the work of the transplantation has to be done in the sun then few plants should be taken out from the sapling depot at a time and they should be kept in the shady place .
It will be good that the roots of the plant would be kept dipping in the water .
Like cluster bean and millet sowing time also has a huge impact over production of the madua but any significant research has not been done on this aspect .
The main reason of this is that area of the madua is very scattered and it has been kept untouched from the modern and scientific methods of the cultivation because it is not treated as any important crop .
This is the surprising thing that in the beginning of this century itself famous book of the writer Dr . Lessi C Kalmen ` Madua ki Maisoor me Kheti ` was published .
In this book all the works done till that time have been described in detail .
Calman reviewed the results of the experiment done from the year 1909 to 1914 at the sowing time in this book about him and mentioned in summary that this experiment was done in the Bangalore .
There was always less yielding got from the sowing which was made between 1st July to 1st August than the sowing which was made before 1st July .
It came to know from the experiments done in the last ten years that the best time to sow the madua is the month of the July .
Crop cultivated in this month saves from the effect of the drought , pests and diseases .
But this question raises that can crop like madua be sown at the best t e ?
This is the crop which is sown especially in the dry parts and its sowing depends on the fall of the rain .
By taking care of these factors under the All Indian program of the Coarse Grain Reformation Scheme some experiments were done by taking the varieties which produce high .
In the South India three crops of the madua could be taken in a year it means it could be cultivated in the summer and winter weathers .
Beside sowing time , the method of the sowing and techniques also have a vital impact over the yielding of the media .
It comes to know from the experiments which are started in this century that high yielding was got from the madua which have been sown in the row .
Although this sowing process of the crop was not much better than Utera .
But to control the weeds etc . became easy and almost equal distance could be kept among plants .
From such different experiments yielding of madua was found much more form the utera method of the sowing .
Presentation of the method to sow in the rows was made in the farmer ` s land and the importance of the sowing madua in the row was explained to them .
It was told to farmers that now these are planted in the row mostly .
Yes , at least it is must that in the dry parts it is still sown by scattering .
The non-existent job has been done at the sowing time of the other coarse grains : cornice , Kodo , mite etc .
Actually whenever it rained of the monsoon -LRB- early or late -RRB- and got time after sowing of all crops , then coarse grains are sown .
Sometimes if monsoon rain comes very late from its time and no time left to sow any other crops then these coarse grains were sown .
Its mean that no best sowing time was tested for it and not even it was emphasized to sow these grains in time .
Sometimes these crops are planted with the other important crops its mean , while sowing the important crops these crops are also sown .
There is no well-founded arrangement of the grain storage in the Hariyana .
Nearly 57 million metric tons food grain of the state is lying in the open .
Although the government has started to control this problem by deciding to make the Godown of the 22 million metric tons capacity .
In the state the capacity of the food grain storage is 84.23 million tons .
State ` s own godowns food grain storage capacity is 48.79 million tons .
Godowns with the capacity of the 5.24 million tons have been created under the Private Entrepreneur Guarantee Scheme .
Storage of the 30.20 million tons food grains is done in the can or in open .
The government also assumes this arrangement as storage capacity .
Right now the state has 70 million 60 thousand 425 metric ton food grains .
In this only 13 million 16 thousand 421 metric tons food grains is safe in the covered area -LRB- godowns -RRB- .
57 million 44 thousand 3 metric tons good grain is reclined in the open .
In the condition of any natural calamity this grain can not be saved .
Even this time precious grains of the billion rupees could be lost to rain in the open .
The purchasing of the rice of the Kharif season has not been completed yet and there is just a week for starting of the wheat purchasing season .
Other side , despite of the critical condition of the storage , food management of the government is sitting idle .
In the coming 1st June till the procurement will be finished there will be more than 9 billion tons of the stock of the food grains , which will be the highest ever .
It will be a big challenge for the government to take care of this huge amount of the food grains .
The eyes of the central government which kept silent for a years to evacuate the gardens is opened now .
In the hustle and bustle , though the decision was taken to export nearly one billion wheat but in this , exportation of only 25 million tons has been possible yet .
For the exportation of the private traders 50 millions amount of the wheat has been assigned , but looking at the clauses of the exportation there is less chance to accomplish this transaction .
In the country , during last two years record production in the agriculture has been done .
Due to unforesightful government policies private traders were kept far from the procurement .
Whereas government without thinking about it have been buying rice and wheat blindly .
In the stock of the government in against of the Buffer Standard and Strategic Standard was many times more grains .
And against of it the facility of the grain storage were shortened .
Therefore million tons of the grain had to keep under the open sky at different places covering from the polythene .
According to the statistics of the Food Ministry beside central and state the total storage capacity of the private godowns is 6.1 crore tons .
In this unstable godowns made in open are also included .
Last year on 1st June stock of the food grains was 8.2 million tons , due to storage of that , condition of the government was worst .
But in the coming wheat procurement season starting from 1st April the this quantity of the food grains will be even more than 9 million tons .
Before purchaseing of the wheat starts purchasing of the rice is going to reach its highest level .
The purchasing of the rice has become 2.82 million tons till the second week of March , which is more than the last year ` s 2.72 million tons of this period .
In the different markets even now 1.79 billion rice is being purchased daily .
The difference between the demand and availability of the godowns has increased yearly .
After adding every kind of the storage capacity government can not store more than seven million tons food grains .
In this temporary godowns capacity is also included .
Whereas stock of the food grains will increase higher than 9 crore tons .
Regarding this palpitation of the food ministry has increased .
Officers are suffocating .
Its mean there is complete chance of the wastage of the 2 crore tons food grains .
How many attempts would be done from the techniques like polyethylene and other unstable resources by our policy-makers , but it is certain to have the loss of rupees in crore .
After green revolution , storage facility was not thought of in respect of the increase in the production of the food grains .
For the food security to food grain storage and its operation government has established the Food Corporation of India -LRB- FCI -RRB- and the Central Warehousing Corporation -LRB- CWC -RRB- .
Its activities remained limited to the states which have green revolution .
The godowns were made but beside Punjab , Haryana and Western Uttar Pradesh nothing has happened in the other part of the nation .
Looking at the need of the ration system storage agencies were made in the states .
But due to limited resources except Chattisgadh , Madhya Pradesh , Andhra Pradesh condition of the other states remained same .
Production in the agricultural field became more than the domestic demand .
But by this respect FCI did not increase the limit of food grain storage .
Hence , logical solution was not thought about the imbalance between the storage facility and the need .
New godowns were made in the states where storage facility was already available .
Looking at the need of the strategic storage with the food security government set up the mind to give the opportunity to the private investors , but half heartedly .
It is a result of that , that the attempts of the government are proving insufficient .
Actually , in front of the government there is a most vital problem of the credence and reliability of the policies .
Which conditions and facilities are have been announced to give to the private investors , investors are not being attracted from that .
The rent of the godowns which has been fixed years back , their rate of the rent is not being modified .
In comparison of those the rent of the temporary godowns which store covering by tarpaulin is more than old godowns .
Condition is becoming worsen instead of becoming better due to no change in the work method of the FCI which is lost to bureaucracy .
There is a lack of the tactical stability , due to that investors are not coming front to build the godowns .
The condition of the extensity of the godowns is that worst , that after purchasing from Bihar rice go to Ludhiyana , rice become ready in their rice mill and then rice reach of the markets of the Bihar .
Government does not have attention to such irregularities .
From the agricultural ministry it has been decided to make the godawns in every village , but this scheme did not reach to villages .
In the Punjab which is leading in the agricultural production , FCI and other agencies have storage capacity of the food grains is about 25 lakh tons , but in this there is covered storage of nearly 10 lakh tons .
Rest storage is done in the temporary godowns -LRB- plinth -RRB- made under the open sky .
Plinth means storage is done over the setup made on the land which is covered by the tarpaulin .
To remove the problem of the storage it has been trying to increase the storage capacity constantly through the private sector .
Last year itself through Pangrain 27 godowns were made by the private sector and godowns of the 3 lakh metric tons is suppose to handover to the FCI by pangrain .
However , after the center ` s permission building of the plinth with the 4 lakh metric tons storage capacity is also supposed to be started .
From this the storage capacity of the state will be increased .
However , in the Amritsar district by a company of the private sector ultra-modern covered godown of the 50 thousand metric tons has been made , where facility of the all the scientific methods like temperature regulator is available .
There is possibility that on the basis of the PPP the green single will be given to the building of such more godowns .
Earlier farmers of our country used to do storage in the home .
Then farmer used to play its role in the three levels of the agriculture -LRB- Production , storage , marketing -RRB- .
Now it is not happening so is the actual root of this problem .
In the old days farmers used to preserve grains in the traditional manners from one season to another season .
Due to this the need of the villagers related to grains used to be fulfilled at the low cost .
Today if government wish then this condition could be applied through the Gram Panchayat system .
Today due to insecurity of the grain farmers have to be helpless to sell the grains just after the harvesting .
After harvesting at which minimum support price procurement is done , if that procurement from the farmer would be done later , during that period the proper amount would be given in addition with MSP to the farmer for the secure storage of the grains then with the solution of the storage farmers will get extra income also .
For the more time period if farmers would get proper incentives then due to this , financial problems will not come to arrange the resources related to the storage to the farmers .
In the state to build the godowns for the farmers provision of the help was done , but the amount is not being used .
There is role of the Consumer Protection , Cooperative and Agriculture Department in the construction of the godowns for the grain storage .
Through them the construction of the godown is done in the government , cooperative and private sector .
At the government and the cooperative level storage capacity is 9.48 lakh tons at present , whereas in the year 2011-12 , 177.62 lakh tons grain has been produced .
Government gives five lakh rupees in grant to the farmers for the godown construction of the 100 tons storage capacity at their level .
There is a provision of the help also if the roof is made of the asbestos .
There is no restriction to the farmer to make the solid roof .
The government grant will be given five lakhs itself but farmers are free to spend maximum amount .
Beside that , there is also 50 % subsidy over the metal store of the 5 to 20 quintal storage capacity to the farmer by the government .
Due to this there will be the storage facility available in every house of the farmer .
In the year 2011-12 , instead of the aim of the 300 grain store only 161 was constructed by farmers .
In this respect in against of 15 crore just 3.88 crore rupees were used .
In the metal store in comparison of 8.46 crore just 6.28 crore was invested .
In the financial year 2012-13 instead of the prescribed amount 5 crore for the metal store just 3.35 crore could be used .
During this period 500 gardens of the 200 metric tons capacity were supposed to be constructed by the farmers .
For this , from the provision of the 25 crores only 4.31 crore was used .
To settle the grain storage problem government has moved to the Private Public Partnership Model -LRB- PPP Model -RRB- but toward this such interest of the private involvement did not come forward got to see in other schemes .
After the application of the Food Security Bill the condition of the grain storage will be worsened more .
Then there will have to do the arrangement of the extra 100 laks tons food grain storage , for that There is no arrangements in the Uttar Pradesh .
At the present moment in the UP the maximum food grain storage is just 44 lakh tons whereas mostly -LRB- in June -RRB- there is the need of godowns of the maximum 70 lakh tons storage capacity .
Food Corporation of India has godowns of the 14 lakh metric tons .
Beside that , the State Warehousing Corporation , Central Warehousing Corporation , PCF and Mandi Samiti have the capacity to store 15.85 lakh metric tons .
Rest with the help of the private sector food grains are stored .
According to official statistics , according to the need of the storage of the food grains -LRB- wheat and rice -RRB- at least there is the need for the construction of the 26 lakh tons storage .
To encourage the private investment now government is going to bring the new government policy .
According to the sources , in this guarantee to take the godowns on the rent for ten years will be given to the private sector on those which are constructed by them .
These godowns will be situated in those places , where there will be maximum need of the storage .
Although to increase the storage capacity of the food grains , on the instruction of the central government on the basis of the Public-Private Partnership it was supposed to complete the construction of the godowns of the 26.81 lakh tons capacity two years back , but now godwns of the 6 lakh metric tons could not be completed even .
The main secretory Javed Usmani has given the instruction to complete it any how till March .
Simultaneously he has told to bring the speed in the construction of the rest godowns of the 21 lakh tons capacity .
On the instruction of the central government four years back from now in the different districts at 56 places on the basis of the PPP Model godowns were supposed to be constructed .
Situation is this that till now at many places for the godowns just site inspection work could be done .
Grain storage problem has remained same .
Due to government policies the private investor considers it loss making barter whereas government attempts are proving insufficient .
In such case , like old period if encouragement would be given to the arrangement of the storage by the farmers themselves then at the large extent problem could be settled .
For this , farmers will have to take care of the little things while making the warehouse .
Under the first step of the storage this is mandatory to decide that the moisture of the grain would be abated completely .
In the second step the design of the storage construction and the material which is used to be taken care .
However in the whole country there is the need of the special design to save from moisture , rats , funguses but being a vast country here geogrophical condition , climate and soil of the every region is different .
That ` s why , according to the local conditions there is the need to design the storage construction in different areas .
On this matter there is the need to give attention to the capacity of the farmers to spend .
Between the land and storage construction such impervious layer should be made which should be from the soil , plastic sheet , concrete or stone .
It should be completely waterproof .
Even roof should be covered simultaneously so that when it will be open then accumulated water would drain first and water could not go inside any how .
The storage construction  container should be airtight .
In condition of the room , such arrangement of the windows and doors should be done that water should not reach inside .
From the arictecture point of view , many methods may be successful in the construction of the storage setup .
Due the possibility of the water clog construction should be done on the heighten place .
In the condition of the danger of the draught and in respective of the labor , construction should be lifted from the land with the help of the setup of the concrete or steel or wood .
If storage construction is inside the house then it should be kept away from the moist places like washing places .
It should be kind of the place , which place gets enough sunlight .
In the condition if setup is outside then it should not be under the tree groves or near the buildings but should be in the open area .
Setup should not be constructed in the north direction of the mound or hill .
Due to this sunlight will be interrupted .
According to the principal of the architecture grain storage should be done in the north-west direction .
The deepest impact of the inflation has been done over food stuffs , especially vegetables .
Situations are such that for the cost cutting in the kitchen of the town the quantity of the green vegetables have been lessened .
But what will happen if a technique would be developed to grow the vegetables in the house and to give yielding of the millions just in hundred-two hundred yards l d ?
With such exercise itself Indian Agriculture Research Institute , Pusa is organizing the agricultural fair .
In the fair institute is going to take off the curtain from such techniques , from that people who stay in the cities like Delhi-NCR could grow vegetables in the container , balcony , roof of the house or outside in the open land .
With this technique by increasing the nutrients in the vegetables , by the nutrient security , fruit-vegetable processing etc . the work to increase the income could be done also .
If believe on the scientists , to fulfill the needs of the food , success has been got till some extent .
Now the main problem is the lack of the nutrients in the eating habit .
Due to that every third child which take birth is the victim of the malnutrition .
By taking care of this , now there is emphasis over to increase the nutrients of the fruits and vegetables .
For this things are being prepared by processing the fruits-vegetables , in that vitamin , iron , zink etc is present in the proper amount .
Grow vegetable on the roof and in the balcony : Director of the Indian Agriculture Research Institute Dr . HS Gupta said that vegetables could be grown in the container and vases .
Scientists of the institute are encouraging this technique .
On the balcony or roof , cauliflower , red cauliflower with spinach leafy vegetables can be cultivated .
Less Land , income of millions : Pusa institute has developed such low cost poly house technique , from that , by producing vegetables and their seeds in the 100 yard of the land in the cities millions can be earned .
Passing valentine day it has not even been a month .
In India , this day became more popular due to the nuisance of the cultural guards .
This day is also remembered for the sell of the roses in the country to express the love and record exportation in the abroad .
Reputation of the flower of the Bengluru and Pune has been established in the whole world and due to temptation of the government encouragement and to earn the foreign currency new fields are emerging .
Himachal Pradesh and Sikkim are emerging as a new center of the flowers cultivation and exportation .
The dreaded drought in the Maharashtra has made the hype in which closer of the many electric stations is also included which provide electricity to the state .
Famous journalist P Sainath has pointed the finger to which reasons while describing this crisis , in those popularity of the rose cultivation is prominent .
Rose is the plant which demands too much water , nearly 20 times more in comparison of the wheat and paddy .
To grow a flower of the rose , about ten liter water is needed .
In the Maharashtra even the crop of the sugar cane absorbs fourfold more water in comparison of the wheat and paddy .
Government policies -LRB- export of the flower of about hundred crore rupees -RRB- to move towards the new production -LRB- taking care of foreign markets flowers are got more encouragement -RRB- by abandoning the traditional cycle of the cultivation have been made by just taking account of the present , but eyes are closed to their long term social and environmental side-effects .
There is a complete speculation of the water crisis of the Maharashtra being country wide .
Rose , symbol of the tenderness and love is also becoming a huge reason of the soil water crisis .
Its capital Bengluru is also called as the city of the roses .
Here in the area of the nursery of the export oriented flowers like rose increased by 15 percent , but no growth in the production was seen .
Due to lack of skilled gardeners , increase in the rates of the electricity and fall in the level of soil water production can not grow also .
The initial cost of the techniques to maintain the favorable temperature inside the greenhouse is high , for this there is need of the good amount of the electricity .
Pushkar of the Rajasthan and Haldi Ghati area has been famous since centuries for the traditional cultivation of the rose and products like rose water and gulkand , but due to the falling level of the soil water since last few years their production and trading have reduced quickly there .
It did not pass many days , when in the Pushkar more than three-fourth of the land had been used in the cultivation of the rose , but now the scenario of there seems changed .
Gradually due to lack of the water deep red color of the rose from there converted into pink color ; the variety of the red rose demands more water .
Many countries of the Africa which is flagrant for its hot climate play the important role in the world flower trade .
Before some time back news had come that the largest trader of the flowers in the world is an Indian , who has started the farming of the flowers in the Ethopiya by purchasing a land fivefold bigger than the area of the Mumbai .
Nawasha lake of the Kenya makes available a favorable climate for the flowers cultivation and exportation of the rose which is grown there has an important part in the country ` s economy .
Netherland , Britain and Germany which are quite aware of the climate , are the biggest buyer of those flowers .
When condition of this life giving lack which was suffering from water storage started to be worsening , then several studies mentioned the reason of the flower business of the Keneya of this .
This is interesting that organizations like Oxygen to the buying roses from Ethopia rise up in the dock on the moral ground .
Saying of it is that Multinational company ` s clamp is how conniving that just 3 percent of the market price reaches to Ethiopia and rest ninety seven percent in the safe of the rich countries .
Price of the onion in Delhi has been blazed by the refusal of the Nashik of the Maharashtra .
Supply of the onion was less before the low yielding .
Then due to less supply from the Nashik of the Maharashtra its price increased .
On the Friday as 45 truck onion reached from Nashik , the rate in the wholesale market fall down to 18 to 22 .
Traders are saying that the price of the onion will fall down more in next one to two days , because nearly 50 truck onion is in the Azadpuri before the price has risen up .
Although , people have to purchase onion in the retail at the rate of the 30-35 rupees per kilo .
It is saying of the traders that price has not increased all of the sudden .
Possiblity about this was from earlier , but the government did not pay the attention .
According to the traders , this year farmers had done less sowing of the onion .
Due to less yielding in the wholesale market the minimum rate did not go below the 14 rupees , whereas in 2012 at this time the minimum rate had reduced to 5 rupees .
At the same , price of the diesel increased .
Due to it the per kilo rent which was two and half rupees , that became three and half rupees .
Meanwhile exportation of the onion remained same as before .
It is saying of the well known agriculture scientist Dr . MS Swaminathan that in the proposed food security bill the government has ignored the farmers and local corporate body completely .
To increase the food grain production emphasizing over the importance of the Minimum Supporting Price -LRB- MSP -RRB- Dr . Swaminathan has described the need of the Minimum Supporting Price of the wheat 1,450 rupees per quintal by increasing from 1,285 rupees per quintal .
It is saying of him that in spite of the increase in the farming cost the supporting price of the wheat has kept as equal to last year , that ` s why it has not been announced yet .
He has said that at looking at the increasing expenditure of the farming the government should decide the MSP for the wheat twofold more than the spending .
While addressing the debate on the topic Starving in India organized by the Commonwealth Journalist Association and the Akshaya Patra Foundation Dr . Swaminathan has termed dangerous even to the scheme of the cash instead of the ration .
Advocating the right of food to all he said that to ascertain the food security the government will have to work by taking with farmers and Gram Sabha .
But in the proposed Food Security Bill They have been ignored completely .
While demanding for the Minimum Supporting price of the pulses also he admitted it essential to fix the double MSP than spending for wheat .
While participating in the conference Abhijeet Mukharjee expressed concern over the reduction of the farming land continuously .
He emphasized the need of the better use of the budget being spent in MANREGA .
At this event , adviser of the Supreme Court Comissioner Biraj Patnayak said that like security at issue of the food security also there should be consensus above party politics .
Admitting proposed Food Security Bill disappointing Patnayak said that India the second largest economy of the world is the biggest center of the hunger and malnutrition .
But this is the best indication that now in the country this issue is being accepted and court has played an important role in this .
Expert of the agriculture policy Devendra Sharma has mentioned the rapid occupation of the cultivating land dangerous for the food security .
Sharma has claimed that the decision to make 8 expressway which has been taken in Mayavati tenure , from that 25 thousand villages will be effected and food crisis may occur in the largest grain producer state of the country .
In the Uttar Pradesh , by the merchandising center of the Food Corporation of the India -LRB- FCI -RRB- and rice mills in the Lok Sabha on Friday a fierce storm occurred on the quibbling issue of the purchasing of the rice on the supporting price .
Out of the way from the party line after raising question on this issue by member of parliament Jagadambika Pal , members of the parties like SP , BJP and RJP etc . demanded the answer over negligence in the rice procurement .
At this issue , proceeding was also interrupted for two times .
Later , after coming and answering in the parliament by the minister on the issue of the food and consumer members became calm down .
The minister said in the parliament that for the investigation of the FCI centers he has sent a team to UP .
In the afternoon session raising the issue of the harassment of the farmers at the FCI centers Jagdambika Pal said that officers of the cooperative are sending farmers back by showing moisture in the paddy .
In helplessness farmers have to sell the paddy to the private shopkeepers at the lower price than supporting price .
After this SP supremo Mulayam Singh Yadav has shown a quite aggressive posturing on this issue .
He said that last year FCI has rejected 90 thousand metric tons rice which was taken under LEVI later saying that its quality is not good .
This is the reason that this time in the Uttar Pradesh rice is not being purchased at the supporting price by rice mills .
On the other side FCI is also troubling farmers .
According to the sources , in this meeting of the CCEA there is possibility to fix the FRP of the sugar cane for 2013-14 crushing season .
In the running crushing season 2012-13 FRP of the sugar cane is 170 rupees per quintal .
FRP is actually the legally fixed minimum price for the sugarcane farmers .
Sugar mills can pay to the sugarcane farmers more than this price .
Agriculture Minister Sharad Pawar has said that due to revive in the supply from the Gujarat , Rajasthan and Maharashtra in the next few days the price of the onion will come down .
Agriculture Ministry gave this information here during the program that matter of the onion will be solved in the few days .
There is a proper storage of the onion in the country .
In the coming days there is the hope of the better supply .
In the some parts of the Gujrat , Rajasthan and Maharashtra after the 15 February , arrival of the new crop will be started .
In the fear of the reduction of the production in the last few day prices of the onion have increased unexpectedly .
According to the government statistics in the national capital the price of the onion by increasing more than twofold has become 31 rupees per kilo , which in last year during this period was 13 rupees per kilo .
In the North India Pawar said on the reason of the onion ` s increasing price , `` I have got information from Nashik and also talked with some traders `` .
Their complaint is that to supply the onion in the country ` s northern part wagons are not being available to them .
In the wholesale rate of the Azadpur Market the price of the onion must have fallen down but in the retail price of the onion is still remained 30 rupees to 40 rupees .
Officers of the Delhi Agriculture Board say that price of the onion had increased due to changes in the climate .
But the new crop has started to arrive .
Due to that in the wholesale market the price of the onion has started to fall .
Development Minister of the Delhi Raj Kumar Chauhan said while releasing the statement that in the capital the price of the onion started to be reduced due to increase in the supply of the onion on Saturday .
The supply of the onion in the Azadpur market was 70 trucks and 10 tempos -LRB- 1500 tons -RRB- , whereas 50 trucks -LRB- 900 tons -RRB- onions of the Friday has been left .
Because of this reason on Friday 2400 tons onion was available in the market .
Due to more supply in the wholesale rate of the onion reduction of three rupees per kilo was registered .
Chauhan has told that due to the attempts of the Delhi Government itself price of the onion has reached from 8.75 to 22 rupees per kilo .
This price was 10 rupees to 25 rupees per kilo on the Friday .
If it will be seen by keeping these statistics of the government aside than the wholesale rate of the onion in the Keshopur Market was 22.5 rupees to 27.5 rupees per kilo .
Whereas on Saturday in the Shahdara vegetable market the wholesale rate of the onion remained 20 rupees to 22 rupees per kilo .
Although saying of the Chauhan is that reduction in the onion price will be continued due to weather recovery and tighten the grip over middleman with the increase in the supply of the onion , because beside Azaadpur market onion is reaching directly to sell in the Okhala , Gazipur , Keshopur and Nashipur etc . market .
Due to the heavy supply of the onion there is hope to become onion ` s price normal by next week .
Chauhan said that in the markets of the capital onion comes from Gujrat , Maharashtra , Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh .
In these states even the wholesale price of the onion has been reduced .
Reason of this is , farmers sending onion to the markets by taking out from the farm after weather became better .
The wholesale price of the onion has been registered 10 rupees to 16 rupees per kilo in the Rajasthan , 16 rupees to 20 rupees in Gujarat and 21 to 22 rupees per kilo in the Maharashtra .
Minister Chauhan said that to control the onion price quickly every possible effort is being taken and close supervision is being kept on the onion hoarding .
In the 12th five yearly scheme focus will be on the making agriculture a beneficiary deal .
New techniques to cultivate will be taught to the farmers .
Small farmers will be adhered to the agricultural scientific centers .
More machinery will be made available on the subsidy .
Plowing is decreasing continuously , that ` s why less land has been left to the farmers .
Due to the urban population every year thousands acre land reduces .
In the coming time there should not be the lack of food grains that ` s why preparation has been started from early .
The Indian Agriculture Research Institute will spend six thousand crore rupees on the 12th five yearly agriculture planning .
In the country there are already 637 agriculture research centers .
In this scheme , ambition to open 50 new agriculture research center has been kept .
In the big districts two agriculture research centers may be open .
Customer will get relief from the high price of the onion in the next month itself .
In the February last the supply of the new onion will be started .
After this only continuation of the down fall in the price will start .
Actually , the price of the onion is increasing so because due to drought in the southern and western states it has a bad impact over onion cultivation .
Topper in the onion cultivation with Maharashtra and Gujarat Karnataka also remained under the impact of the draught .
Due to this there is speculation of downfall in the yielding of the onion till 20 percent .
There is still some delay for new crop to reach in the market .
In the last week of the February new onions will start to reach in the market , from that there is chance to have condition better .
Till then costly onion will keep you crying .
Right now this is the condition that due to being onion costly in the domestic market its exportation is also being affected .
According to the recent anticipation of the National Council of Applied Economic Research in the present financial year 2012-13 the yielding of the onion will be less than 20 percent in against the 1.63 crore tons of the last year .
Taking advantage of this , stockpiles have become active .
Despite that due to the effect of the cold and fog also supply of the onion in the markets has become affected .
Without farmers the politics and economy of the country is not complete .
At the political level attempts to attract the farmers are done plenty , but the important question is even this that despite that why the condition of the farmer is not very good .
Why suicide news of the farmers are coming from the different corners of the country .
After sitting among the farmers itself their disappointment comes to know .
They , getting away from the whole calculation say just one thing that things are not remained like before .
Now seeds have to be bought and even a good amount of the fertilizer is used .
He takes the debt in the vicissitude to produce more money by making the land producing machine and take the decisions like ending the life when production is not according to expectation .
In an era , farmers used to have storage of seeds in the enough amount , from that he used to grow new crop from his farm ` s seed .
He used to use dung fertilizer instead of chemical fertilizer .
For this , animals used to be cared for .
But time changed and cultivation-farming changed also .
Instead of the dung fertilizer chemical fertilizer came and place of the local seeds were taken by the hybrid and new seeds .
Despite of changing all the methods the situation of the farmer did not change .
In temptation of the more yielding farmers are being deprived from their right to cultivate the seeds .
Earlier he used to save seed for the next time at the harvest time , but now he has to take debt to buy the new seed .
The new variety of the seed comes in one lakh , ten thousand rupees per kilo .
Instead of the chemical fertilizer farmers lessened the use of the dung and earthworm and more than daughter ` s marriage he is tormented by this worry that how many bags fertilizers will have to bring .
Now when across the country it is being debated over the seed bill , then it will have to take care that what farmers want .
The production must will increase from the new seed , but every year million tons of the wheat which is rotten , what will happen to that .
Due to lack of the cold storage farmers leave the potato crop just like that .
In such situation will he do more product n ?
In the Karnawal of the Merut there are farmers like Satish Kumar , who came on this stubbornity that we have to save ourself , then will have to move towards the old fashioned organic farming .
If farmers have their own seed and their own fertilizer , then there can not be any big dignity than this for farmers .
Why just Satish Kumar , Subodh Tyagi of the Bhumi village from same district has made a small attempt that through the organic farming they should save their land to be infertile .
There may be many reasons in favor to bring the seed bill , but from the mouth of the farmer just it comes out that now even seed did not remain ours .
The growing trend of the hybrid seeds and dependency over chemical fertilizer will end up his right to grow the seed from the farmer and will finish the fertility of the land completely .
Including Rakesh Tilket from Bhakiyu many farmer leaders have protested the seed bill .
This is possible that general farmer would not know the technical intricacies of this bill , but they want their right .
There are many farmers like Satish Kumar and Subodh Tyagi from the Meruth district , who are with the help of the organic farming doing the work to save the land like their mother .
It is also claimed that from this everyone will be benefitted , but if similar rut will be remained , then farmer who cultivate the seed will be the consumer who purchase the seed .
Due to chemical fertilizer land will be infertile .
Yet it has not been late .
We will have to bring the movements in favor of the organic farming which is running in different villages of the Meruth to the whole country .
The farmer will have to understand this that it is much better than to earn less benefit by much costing that he would keep less costing and would adopt more ways of the saving .
It will be the trend to earn profit by betting the life , then suicide of the farmers will not stop .
With the increase in the price of the onion Delhi politics has become warm .
BJP sitting in the opposition since last 14 years by losing the power due to onion has started notching .
Former central minister Vijay Goyal even sold cheap onion at Red fort on Friday to oppose .
Leader of the opposition in the Delhi parliament Pro . Vijay Kumar Malhotra has blamed the profiteers and the government for the swiftly rising prices of the onion .
He said that when in 1998 the price of the onion had increased then Congress leaders had roamed in every street putting onion garlands in their neck , but now have kept quiet .
Pro . Malhotra said that by making responsible center Sheela Dixhit can not escape from her responsibility .
At the same itself he demanded to stop the onion export immediately .
On the other side , in against of the rising prices of the onion on Friday in front of Red Fort former central minister of the BJP Vijay Goyal demonstrated by selling the onion at the cheap rate .
Goyal said that export of the onion should be banned .
He put the blame over chief minister that she did not do any remedy while having the time and now to save her image has written the letter to the Central Agriculture Ministry .
Must say that due to the attack of the mediators not just onion but the price of other vegetables are also touching the sky .
Officers of the Delhi Agriculture Board are telling that the market price will be reformed after coming of the new crop due to change in the weather .
In the capital since last few days rise-fall in the price of the onion is continued .
On Friday , in the wholesale , price of the onion remained stable between 10-25 rupees .
But in the retail onion is being sold at 30 to 40 rupees per kilo .
In the retail also the price of the green vegetables is quite high .
The tears of the costly onion will not stop currently .
The wait of being down of the onion price could be stretched longer because to control the price the government has denied to stop the export .
It is the argument of the Finance Ministry that due to the harvest failure farmers have a huge loss .
In this if its exportation will be banned , then farmers may have to suffer its consequences .
In such situation , general people will have to wait for the cheap onion to be stable of the global demands .
According to the Agriculture Ministry cultivation of the onion got affected due to delay in the monsoon in the kharif .
The size of the onion has remained small due to no rain in the time .
Hence the farmers who arranged the irrigation in time , their crop have become better .
Whereas crops of the farmers who were dependent on the rain has become weak .
Due to these reasons this , year fear of the reduction till twenty percent in the production of the onion against of the last year are being expressed .
Although in the productive sector production of the onion is being good .
But In the Product markets the rising price due to the purchasing of the exporter has impacted the price of the consumer markets .
Although in the markets of the North India due to the random supply of the onion from the Rajasthan price of the onion is coming down constantly .
Despite that yet the prices have not become normal .
The wholesale rate of the onion in the Delhi has remained 1000 to 2,500 rupees per quintal .
In a week prices have been reduced from 700 rupees per quintal .
Though the big reason behind the wild increase in the prices of the onion is having draught in many regions and due to that to have less production .
But for this to some extent blaze of the increased tension at the Pakistan border is also responsible .
Due to the tension started in the beginning of the January import of onion which is imported from the Pakistan via the way of the Wagha-Atari has got affected .
Simultaneously , this has also remained that how does complexities of the relationship with the neighboring countries impact the normal policy of the demand and supply .
Saying of the traders who are connected in the business at the border is that though due to tension business did not stop but has been affected .
According to the export-import trader Rajesh Sethiya , enough precaution is being taken after tension at the border .
Especially in the business of the fruit-vegetables there is fear of the decay even from the delay for a day , at the same there is a possibility of the hold of the payment .
At the India-Pak line of the control after the heinous murder of the two Indian soldiers trucks had to wait for many days to cross the border .
Statistics say that on 15th January where more than 300 trucks was standing at the Atari border of the Pakistan to come to India , there , on the next day 8 percent fall occurred in their number .
From the import prices remain in control : in the last one month after boom of the more than 50 percent in the wholesale prices now in domestic market also sign of some fall in the price of the onion is being seen .
Up-down of the prices is creating turbulence in the international market for the Indian onion .
From Sunday evening , raining in the central and eastern parts of the Uttar Pradesh could be proven the drop of the nectar for the crops of the Rabi .
The faces of the farmers have bloomed due to rain .
Crop of the wheat , potato and pulse have got benefited .
In the 24 hours rain of the average 12 centimeter is not being considered enough for the crops of the pulses .
Bloomed flowers of the mustard has suffered from the loss .
Saying of the experts is that the fall in the temprature will have direct impact over the wheat crop .
In the mango groves waiting for the blossoms rain will be beneficial .
Agriculture scientist S K Singh said that crop of the wheat has got panacea due to rain simultaneously crop of the weak peas due to frost will be also benefited .
The grain of the wheat will be big and now their cycle of the ripening will start soon .
There is impact over the mustard ` s flowers due to the fast wind which blew with the rain , where legume has come out there due to fall in the temperature its ripening process will be delayed .
In the central area of the UP and areas of the Awadh there might be an adverse impact of this over crop of the mustard .
Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav on Friday announced the State Advisory Price -LRB- SAP -RRB- for the current crushing season .
In the current crushing season sugar mills will pay the price for the precocious varieties of the sugar cane 290 rupees per quintal to farmers .
Price for the general variety 280 and improper variety 275 rupees per quintal has been fixed .
Government in comparison of the last year has increased 40 rupees in the new crushing season , but in the share of the farmers this increment will come just 37 rupees because in the transportation expenditure three rupees per quintal has been increased .
With farmers the government has tried to keep happy sugar mills as well .
Sugar mills now from the farmers ` sugar cane price will do the reduction with the rate of 8.75 rupees per quintal instead of the 5.75 rupe .
It is the claim of the government that due to rise in the sugarcane price farmers will get 3300 crore rupees more in the sugar cane price in the 2012-13 in comparison of the crushing season 2011-12 and in the current crushing season farmers will be paid nearly 21,500 crore rupees .
In the current financial year company has expectation to obtain the turnover of nearly 700 crore rupees .
Deputy Executive Director of the Dalmiya Bharat Sugar Naresh Paliwal explained that we are bearing loss since 3-4 years .
Last year including power and distillery we were in the loss of the one and half to two crore rupees .
From this July to till now , in the last 3-4 months prices is being retained at the satisfactory level .
This is in the benevolence of the mills and farmers that the state government reinstate the Sugar Incentive Policy .
Recently the company has occupied a reasonable sugar factory in Kolhapur .
In future also we are serious about requisition of the better projects .
The total sugarcane crushing capacity of these mills is 22,500 TCD -LRB- Ton Sugar Cane Per Day -RRB- .
In UP sugar production on every quintal is 9 kilo , whereas in Maharashtra it is till 11-12 kilo .
In the current crushing season in announcing the State Advisory Price the Uttar Pradesh Government is sweating .
The current estimate of the sugar cane harvesting cost has increased the problem of the state government .
Even after the two meetings of the Sugarcane Pricing Committee SAP has not been announced and not even crushing could be started in the state ` s every mills .
On the basis of the last year if SAP would be increased 33.64 percent of the costing than sugarcane cost will be about 300 rupees per quintal .
According to the convenor of the Kissan Jagriti Manch Sudhir Pawar at whichever basis calculation would be done .
Even though the price will be more than 300 rupees .
He said that the costing has been increased by 22 percent .
At this level even if calculation will be done then too price will be 300 rupees .
If assume the basis to the proposed report of the Rangrajan Committee then too it is certain to increase the price of the sugarcane price .
Crushing has not been started even in the half of the state ` s total one hundred fifteen sugar mil .
In the mills in which production of the sugar has been started , in those , sugar is being supplied without any price .
Due to this sugarcane is not being paid .
The government is in the position of the pendency , from the similar situation states ` s sugarcane farmers are also passing through .
The central government to reduce the bill of the fertilizer subsidy could cut in the subsidy of the non-urea fertilizers .
The fertilizer division which is suffering from the lack of the cash to pay the subsidy is thinking to cut in the subsidy at the huge level which is given on the nitrogen , phosphate and potash .
This year there is a possibility of the subsidy bill to be more than 1 lakh rupees .
In such situation to reduce the subsidy bill on the huge level cutting could be done in the subsidy over non-urea fertilizers .
According to the officers on the 31st January meeting is going to be held on the issue of the cutting in the subsidy .
Dr. Yashwant Singh Parmar from Himalaya university Nauni now will prepare the hybrid multipurpose tree for the three states of the North India .
Fuel , fodder and timber wood will be gotten from the tree which will be prepared from this .
Central forest and Climate Ministry and Regional Center established in the Dr . YS Parmar has given the responsibility to prepare the multipurpose hybrid tree to the Basic Science Department of the University .
Work has started on this .
Scientists of the University have started to work on this .
The university will work on this project in the Punjab , Himachal Pradesh and Jammu-Kashmir .
Under this project scientist and field investigator will select the tree .
From the different trees of the agroclimate zone the best tree will be selected .
In this all the qualities branches of the plant , height , radius , volume will be considered .
After this hybrid variety of these plants will be made .
New varieties could be used by the forest department also .
To complete this project with the principal investigator two field investigator will also work .
After completion of the work it will be sent through the regional center of the ministry which is established in the Nauni University Campus to the Central Climate and Forest Ministry .
Under this scheme of the Central Forest and Climate Ministry , scientists of the university first will do the survey in these three states .
For the survey three states have been divided in the zone .
From there clusters of such trees will be made , which will fulfill the need of the fuel , timber wood and fodder .
By surveying such trees unique trees will be marked .
On this basis , a new variety of the hybrid multipurpose trees of the better quality will be created .
Who will be Benefitted : from the development of the new hybrid varieties of the multipurpose tree all of the three states will be benefited .
From just a plant , their needs will be fulfilled .
Simultaneously , officers of the forest department , scientists who are researching on the forests will be benefited from this .
From this , forests will also get encouragement .
The Central Forest and climate Ministry and regional center Nauni has sanctioned 4 lakh rupees for the Identification of Plus Tree and Cluster Pattern on Multipurpose Tree Project .
Under this , hybrid varieties of the multipurpose tree will be developed for Punjab and Jammu-Kashmir .
Which will fulfill the need of the fuel , fodder and timber .
The university will complete this project in a year itself .
Pestered from the challenges of the climate changes the traditional varieties started to be remembered by the agriculture scientists .
Varieties which have been extinct will now reach directly to the farms from gene banks .
After America and China in India there is third largest gene bank of the crops .
At this matter deliberation will be done in the three days international conference of the agriculture scientists organized in Delhi from Tuesday .
Organizing secretory Dr . KC Bansal said about the conference that climate change is a serious challenge for the food security .
In this , gene bank of the crops will be very helpful .
In these gene banks genes of the traditional varieties of the different crops have been preserved .
Now the time has come that it should be popular by planting it directly to the land of the farmers .
In the international conference agriculture scientists of the 32 countries of the world will participate .
Coordinator of the conference Dr . P N Mathur said that almost in the every county of the world some farmers are such who cultivate the traditional crop for their usage .
NDB has announced to start dairy scheme which is running with the help of the world bank in the eight states including Uttar Pradesh .
Under this scheme , in all the states scientific methods will be used to increase the milk productivity by increasing the productivity of the milch animals .
Dr. Amrit Patel , director of the National Dairy Development Board -LRB- NDDB -RRB- has said while giving the detail of the progress of this scheme that from the 14 main milks-producing states 13 have been included in this .
The discussion is being done to Bihar .
In the first cycle the Project Steering Committee has approved 49 proposals in the eight states .
These states are - UP , Punjab , Tamilnadu , Gujarat , Madhya Pradesh , Odisha and Maharashtra .
Under the scheme proposals of the progeny testing of the cattle , pedigree selection , stretngtning of the semen stations , balanced ration program , fodder development has been approved .
In the next one month , there is also the possibility to include Andhra Pradesh , Rajasthan and West Bengal in this scheme .
The success of the crop yielding depend to some extent over proper use of the fertilizer .
To make the proper use of the fertilizer it is necessary to know that which elements -LRB- nutrients -RRB- are needed .
Nitrogen , Phosphorous and Potash are the main elements .
This is also mandatory to know that how is the fertility status of the land and there is lack of which elements .
It can be calculated by the examination of the land .
It is also necessary to know the acerbity of the land , quantity of the fossils , quantity of the salts so that by the use of the fertilizer in the proper form and amount its complete benefit could be taken .
To take the complete benefit of the fertilizer it is must to know this that the crop during its life span absorbs which element in which quantity .
To know this fact it is must to have a complete knowledge of the nutrient uptake pattern .
On the basis of the nutrient uptake pattern benefit may be taken using necessary elements at the right time .
Sometimes , it is necessary to give some fertilizer in many installments .
Even it may happen that instead of putting fertilizer on the land it should be sprayed over the leaves of the crop .
Examination of all these is necessary to do for the different soil , climate and crops .
Soil fertility is quite low in all the areas which grow the coarse grain .
Hence , possibly there is hope to become very beneficial the use of these fertilizers in these crops .
In these crops , growth has been found by using fertilizers in the advance varieties of the cluster bean and millet .
Whatever research has been done till now , that has been done by taking nitrogen and phosphorous together even that research is not enough .
Almost in the soil of the every area which grow cluster bean have a lack of the nitrogen .
After this phosphorous is a second important element .
Although from the comparative perspective it is needed in little less quantity even though this is equally essential as Nitrogen .
It has been known on the basis of the researches which have been done till now that by using the nitrogen manure intensity occurs in the plant ` s reproductive phase and process of the maturity .
Phosphorus also has a similar contribution in this direction .
But its consumption has been assumed more important in the initial life cycle of the plant .
On the consumption of the elements in the cluster bean , Raheja and Cottage -LRB- 1956 -RRB- did the research work in the California -LRB- America -RRB- .
They saw that consumption of the nitrogen and accumulation of the dry element is done almost in the similar form and similar cycle .
Difference is just that consumption of the nitrogen is in more quantity during the fourth and the seventh week of the sowing .
Hairan and friends did such experiment taking hybrid cluster bean ` R.S. 60 ` at Kansasa in America .
The maximum consumption of the nitrogen was happened about 19 days before the stage of the boot leaf .
The absorption of the potassium in comparison of the nitrogen is more in the initial stage of the cluster bean .
It has been seen that till the 43rd days of the sowing , cluster bean absorbs the about half of the total need of the potassium but half of the total amount of the nitrogen and phosphorous is absorbed in the period of the 60-70 days .
The absorption process of the Nitrogen remains continue during the whole lifespan of the cluster bean .
Almost before a week of the harvesting this process becomes slow .
In the beginning of the life span till 60-70 days leaves and stem absorb the maximum amount of the nitrogen and after this displacement of the absorbed nitrogen becomes towards the grains or becoming ready by ripening of the cluster bean .
Till this time almost 65-70 percent nitrogen has been transferred into the corn .
Like nitrogen itself , there is cycle of the process of the phosphorous absorption hence if fertilizer with phosphorous would be used in enough quantity then there is possibility to absorb it in more quantity .
The absorption process of the phosphorous in the initial stage of the cluster bean is slow in comparison to the nitrogen .
This is the very interesting thing that 70-85 percent part of the quantity of the absorbed phosphorous is transferred into corn of the cluster bean from the leaf and stem .
Thus in comparison to the nitrogen the process of the phosphorous transfer is more dense and important .
There is a possibility of the more reformation in the process of the phosphorous absorption by the availability of the nitrogen in the enough quantity .
The taken quantity of the phosphorous by the plant has been seen increasing to 40-50 percent .
Its meaning is this that to take the complete advantage of the nitrogen and phosphorous fertilizer it is essential that best quantity of both should be used .
It is called balanced fertilizer use .
The cycle of the potassium absorption has been found little different from the nitrogen and phosphorous .
The plant absorbs its maximum quantity in its initial stage itself .
The extreme of the potassium consumption has been seen almost 10 days before of the ripening of the cluster bean .
From the other parts of the plant very less potash is transferred into corn .
Like the other corps itself before 1950 in the cultivation of the cluster bean the use of the fertilizer was almost negligible .
In so far that in the developing countries even mostly fertilizers were not used .
After the development of the hybrid of the cluster bean and the varieties which give more yielding the requirement of the nitrogen was emphasized .
If it would be seen then generally a huge lack of this element is found in the Indian soil .
To say this that the whole area of the cluster bean itself is the necessitous from the perspective of the level of the soil-nitrogen , will not be hyperbole .
Simultaneously , it is also true that the reaction against nitrogen fertilizer -LRB- Impact over the yielding of the grain -RRB- is more than quantity and very beneficial .
The green color of the plant tells the utility of its use , from the far .
Here a fact also comes in front that from the local varieties also it is possible to take more yielding in comparison of the present yielding but if their cultivation would be done from the scientific methods .
But the cultivation of the hybrid varieties has been proved beneficial even without fertilizers or organic fertilizers .
In comparison of the Swarn all the other varieties have been found better from the perspective of the total yielding and per day productivity .
After finding the reaction equation the maximum quantity of the nitrogen for the any variety could be measured .
In fact , this is the boundary , by increasing the quantity of the element more from that the yielding of the grains reduces .
Hence on the basis of the yielding capacity of the two varieties and response to the nitrogen requirement , optimum quantity of the nitrogen could be measured .
Dr. S . P . Singh and Hari Singh -LRB- 1976 -RRB- in New Delhi have also done the different experiments on hybrid cluster bean and reformed varieties to test the best quantity of the nitrogen in the Kharif seasons of the 1972 and 1973 .
Hybrid varieties had various reaction towards nitrogen .
Krishnamurti and other -LRB- 1975 -RRB- saw that by giving large quantities of the nitrogen there was a bad impact over the production of the hybrid cluster bean .
In the developed varieties from the perspective of the yielding CSH-6 was found almost equal to the CSH-1 .
All hybrid varieties which give more yielding and yielding of the developed varieties was more in comparison to the local varieties even without the nitrogen fertilizer .
Yielding of the CSH-1 , 2 , 3 , 4 and 5 was found two and half and three times more than the local varieties .
It is must that if nitrogen fertilizer is not available or possible even though the cultivation of the hybrid cluster bean is beneficial .
These varieties have more power to absorb the both kinds of the nitrogen in the soil and which is given through the fertilizer and capacity to convert it into yielding of the grains in comparison of the local varieties .
Due to this reason , their production than local varieties was found to 53-81 percent more even without nitrogen fertilizer .
Mostly in the varieties only 49-55 percent of the given nitrogen is used .
But hybrid varieties use the 60-85 percent of the nitrogen .
How the quantity of the nitrogen increases likewise the percentage quantity of the consumed nitrogen decreases .
Due to use of the nitrogen the yielding of the grains was found every kilo more of hybrid and developed varieties in comparison of the local varieties .
The main reason for this more yielding of the hybrid varieties has been assumed their complete growth and reproduction in the presence of the nitrogen .
It has been known on the basis of the experiments that by giving the proper quantity of the nitrogen in the hybrid cluster bean the number of the plants which carry corn increase .
Like this nitrogen has a useful impact over the length and grains of the corn .
In every corn weight of the grain increases .
Despite that , there is also unexpected reformation in the length of the plant and storage of the dry element etc . growth processes .
Due to the impact of the all these yielding cases itself the growth in the yielding occurs .
The optimum quantity of the nitrogen -LRB- from the economic criteria -RRB- depends also on the variety of the soil and climate .
In the season of the Rabi the cluster bean is cultivated in the Southern region of the country .
For the cluster bean of this weather the only resource of the water-receipt is the preserved moisture in the soil .
Often in this season the yielding of the cluster bean grain per hectare and quantity of the response of the nitrogen is less in comparison of the Kharif .
To study the response of the nitrogen on the cluster bean of this weather research program has been organized .
Mahapatra and friends -LRB- 1973 -RRB- studied the results of the experiment of the almost 422 simple fertilizers and found that the quantity of the reaction toward nitrogen of the cluster bean of the Rabi season was quite low in comparison of the Kharif season .
Despite of being a long term variety also M-35-1 was found in these experiments which gives more yielding .
The reason for it is being this that in the year of the both experiments the enough amount of the moisture was present in the soil .
Generally , for the Rabi short termed -LRB- which gets ready in a short time by ripening -RRB- varieties has been found good because their life cycle complete from the moisture present in the soil .
CSH-1 is a such variety which adapts its life according to the moisture available in the soil , thus it has been also found best for the Rabi season .
Due to the less total period of the Rabi season -LRB- crop season -RRB- or we might say that due to the less life span of the proper varieties for this weather , their productivity is less in comparison of the Kharif varieties .
Due to this reason the required amount of the nitrogen is also used less .
To measure the optimum quantity of the cluster bean in Rabi it is must to do work constantly so that to make the coming developed varieties useful proper recommendation could be done time to time for the regions of the different soil and climate .
simultaneously there is need to research on the vegetative growth and cycle of the elements absorption during this season .
It will also have to examine properly in the regions of the Rabi sorghum that till the certain depth if a certain quantity of the moisture is present at the time of the sowing of the sorghum then how much amount of the nitrogen will be beneficial to use .
For the success of this work the mutual support of the agriculture and climate scholars is most needed then only it would be possible to establish the experimental harmony between moisture present in the soil -LRB- time and quantity etc. -RRB- and rain .
For the All Indian Dry Agriculture Scheme of the dryland farming under the Central Research Institute Hyderabad an important work is being done on these animals .
If land is of the heavy -LRB- clay -RRB- variety then the possibility of the loss of the used nitrogen reduces because its maximum quantity is absorbed by the soil which can be absorbed by the plants of the cluster bean as per their need .
Generally fertilizers are used in the soil or by spraying over the leaves .
In the method of putting fertilizer in the soil in comparison of the Utera method placement of the fertilizer has been found better because plants use fertilizer easily which has been used by this method .
From this method in the experiment the density of the elements in the soil certainly increases but it is not harmful so this method has been assumed the best method to use the fertilizer .
Under the All Indian Sorghum Reformation Scheme till two years at the 9 research centers which are established in the main regions which cultivate sorghum research was done .
In this study 100 kilogram nitrogen per hectare was given by the methods and on the time written below .
The whole nitrogen was given in the soil during sowing .
The half of the total amount of the nitrogen while sowing and the rest were given in the soil at the knee high stage of the sorghum .
The other installment after giving with the rows of the sorghum was mixed properly into the soil .
Half of the total amount of the nitrogen was used at the time of the sowing and rest half of the amount was given at the knee length stage by sprinkling over leaves .
It has been come to know from the results that it was best to put the complete amount of the nitrogen into the soil while sawing .
The use of the fertilizer in the soil was found more useful in comparison of the sprinkling over the leaves .
By using the nitrogen fertilizer late the reduction in the yielding of the sorghum was found .
At the Indore and Hyderabad centers it was more useful to put 100 kilogram nitrogen in two equal installments .
In the cultivation of the sorghum the total prescribed amount of the nitrogen should be used while sowing itself .
At the Surat and Bharatpur Centers it has been found beneficial to use nitrogen in two installments in comparison to the single installment .
At these two places soil is of the bit light variety , by using the amount of the nitrogen all at once due to less nitrogen absorption capacity of the soil perhaps suffered the loss .
Thus plants could not be benefited with this and due to lack of the nitrogen the yielding capacity of the sorghum was fallen .
In such soils an important quantity of the nitrogen gets lost and according to the requirement of the plants especially during the mid and last of the life the requirement of the nitrogen does not get fulfilled .
Eventually it has a bad impact over the vegetative growth and other developmental production processes .
Hence it will be useful to use the nitrogen in installments in the light soil for the successful cultivation of the sorghum .
Dryland sorghum may have to face the lack of the moisture in the soil in any period of its life cycle .
In such unstable situation if the whole amount of the nitrogen would be given at the time of sowing then there is a possibility of the heavy loss .
Hence it has been anticipated proper that the half of the proposed amount of the nitrogen should be given at the time of the sowing and half of the rest should bring in use when enough moisture would be in the soil otherwise it will be proper to give half amount of the total amount .
Actually method of the sprinkling of the nitrogen over the leaves was not found successful in most of the experiments , there may be many reasons for this .
In the soils , which have any particular problem as such lack of the micro nutrient like zinc then to fulfill that this method has been found successful .
Its use may be brought in the work to mid season improvement .
Such as if the lack of any nutrient has been felt during the crop growth then this method may be adopted because elements given by this method become available to the plants earlier than the elements given in the soil .
If soil have the lack of the moisture then through the spraying method the quantity of the few elements could be used .
In the last it is there that spray and use of the elements in the soil have to do in such methods that in both of the conditions the availability of the elements would be at the right time of the requirement of the plants .
In the sorghum like nitrogen itself phosphorous is also an important and essential nutrient .
In the plant physiology it has a huge importance .
This effort remains active particularly in the division .
From this the growth of the roots becomes good , grain becomes big and timing of the ripening reduces .
In the plants , power to face the disease and other enemies increases .
Development in the yielding of the grain and reformation in the nutrients is done also through phosphorus .
It will be best that use of the phosphorous should be on the basis of the soil degradation .
In fact , after the development of the hybrid varieties that is after 1975 a special attention was given towards this .
It came to know through the results of these experiments that to take the good yielding of the hybrid sorghum generally the use of the 50 kilograms phosphorus per hectare was found best on the economical perspective .
The amount of the phosphorous should be decided on the basis of the soil examination .
Generally this quantity of the phosphorous is used at the time of the sowing of the sorghum .
Generally it can be given 4-5 cm below from the seed through stock or dust in the traditional Plough .
At the time of using phosphorous in the sorghum any research was not done yet .
It came to know from the researches done on the other crops that it will be best to use the total amount of the phosphorous at the time of the sowing .
The reason for it is this that phosphorous is very supportive in the development of the roots of the plant and plant starts to develop properly in its initial life period .
It has a good impact over the yielding capacity of the plant .
In the sorghum it is essential to have a good growth of the roots in the beginning so that plant can fulfill its requirement of the water properly even in the dry circumstances .
From the perspective of to increase this capacity of the plant Dr . B. B . Turkhere gave phosphorous in the CSH-1 at different times .
The total amount of the phosphorous was given at the depth of about 4-5 cm .
It was found from the results that it did not have any particular effect of the timing of giving phosphorous over the yielding of the sorghum hence to give all the amount at a time was anticipated useful practically .
Placement of the phosphorous and to use through the spraying over the leaves is more beneficial in comparison of the Utera method .
Perhaps reason of it is this that through these methods possibility of absorption of the phosphorus from the soil reduces because it comes in contact with the very little part of the soil .
Thus , phosphorous is not absorbed by the soil in the form which could not be used .
If its phosphorous level of the soil would be enough high then method of the Utera may be adopted .
No any bad impact was found on the germination percentage and motion by sowing phosphorus fertilizer mixing with the seed .
Plants were seen healthy since the beginning .
Phosphorus fertilizers are available in many forms , in those many are made in the factory .
To reform the agricultural land and agricultural techniques like leveling the land , to make barren and infertile land fertile , to dig the well , to make the ridge , irrigation , creation of the resources and and give them strong form .
To arrange the long term loan to purchase the agriculture machine-equipment .
To make the farm house , dam , drain , godown , cattle shed .
Land development banks are expanding the loan works for development of the agriculture assisting works like dairy , poultry , to cultivate the fruit nursery , bi0-gas plant , wind mill .
To work like as a form of the link between long term banking and national agriculture and village development bank NABARD and the government .
