The biggest drawback of this scheme is that this subsidy is not linked up with the inflation rate .
Delhi is an urban territory .
There banks are in abundance and most of the people also have bank accounts .
The same thing can also be said about aadhar card .
But various complaints are coming up in other territories of the country .
The most important thing is that the needy will only get the money if their fingerprint matches the database of UIDAI .
Now , let us look at the ground reality .
The reality of Kotkasim tehsil of Alwar district is before us .
In the four districts of Jharkhand also - Ranchi , Ramgarh , Hazaribagh and Saraikela-kharsava pilot project was started since last December .
In Ramgarh , the laborers of MANREGA were supposed to get the wages on the basis of Adhar card .
There are one lakh , seventy four thousand MANREGA labors but even after a year only five thousand labors have been successfully linked with aadhar card .
Despite this if the central government is in a haste to come up with the cash subsidy scheme , this means that it wants to take the benefit of elections .
If it thinks that it can again come into power because of MANREGA , then why cant the direct investment scheme make the trio of UPA .
Congress is busy in playing the tactics so that the BJP ruled states should not take its advantage .
Actually during the MANREGA scheme , the chief ministers of the BJP ruled states put up their pictures in the MANREGA posters .
Despite the efforts of the congress , in a haste the cash subsidy scheme will definitely be a wastage .
The 65 rupees increase in the minimum support price of wheat by the central government is said to be futile by the farmer organizations .
The organizations say that with this it will be difficult for the farmers to get the disbursement on produce , consequently they will have to face heavy loss .
Seeing the bumper stock the government has agreed to export 25 lakh tonnes of wheat .
If the MSP is not increased then in the coming years the farmers might reduce the produce of wheat .
V. M Singh the convener of National farm laborers organization said that the government has mocked at the farmers by 65 rupees increase in the MSP of wheat .
The farmers will not even get back their disbursement at these rates .
Sudheer Pawar of farmer awareness forum says that there will be an increase of at least 100 rupees per quintal but with an increase of just 65 rupees they have cheated the farmers .
In the horticulture and forestry college near Jhalrapatan on Thursday the annual seminar on all India coordinated research project of dry regions began .
It is being jointly organized by the college and Central dry horticulture institution of Bikaner .
In the seminar there will be talks primarily on the research of fruits .
On the first day of the conference six research papers were presented in the first three sessions .
According to the President Pranab Mukherjee , the development of farming and the concerned areas are the basis of all round progress of the country .
He expects to achieve the target of 4 percent increase in the development in the 12th plan in farming sector .
Mukherjee was speaking here after felicitating the cereal producing states for their fabulous performance .
Amongst the states receiving the award for the best farming , Madhya Pradesh got the first prize for stunning performance in cereal production .
Bihar got the first prize for its fabulous achievement in the yield and production of paddy .
Haryana got the `` Krishi Karman `` prize for the fabulous performance in the yield and production of wheat .
After the discrepancies within the government regarding the minimum support price -LRB- MSP -RRB- of wheat , finally it was declared on Wednesday .
The support price for the current Rabi season will be 1350 rupees which is 65 rupees more than the previous year .
In the CCEA meeting , Food ministry ` s proposal of the export of extra 25 lakh tonnes wheat has been approved .
This has been approved looking at the huge stock of wheat .
Even before this the export of 20 lakh tonnes of wheat was approved .
Actually , the finance and food ministry was not in support of increasing the support price of wheat .
While the food ministry is anxious for storage , the finance ministry is anxious for the increase in food subsidy .
For the year 2013 the Central government might increase the minimum support price of wheat upto 100 rupees .
Last year the MSP of wheat was set to be 1,285 rupees , which can have an increase of 100 rupees this year .
Decision can also be taken on the export of extra 25 lakh tonnes of wheat in the cabinet .
There has been discrepancies within the government regarding the minimum support price of wheat .
Amongst all the wheat producing states sowing is vigorous these days but the farmers are in dilemma as the support price has not been announced .
More than half the wheat has been sown in Uttar Pradesh and Punjab .
The rate of wheat in the world market is good now while the government godowns have stocked more wheat than the requirement .
It is expected that the export of domestic fruits will cross the level of four hundred crores in the current financial year .
The exporters say that there can be feeble increase in quantifiable export while the business is expected to be quite good in terms of price .
Till 2006-07 the export of Indian flowers in the World market remained best .
This year flowers worth around 653 crore rupees were exported .
While the next year the export was reduced to 340 crore rupees .
Since then till the last financial year the export is not stable .
The export in the last financial year was 365 crore rupees .
Naqwi says that there are possibilities of flower export at the world level .
The government is thinking of increasing the export tax on raw sugar .
This can be decided in a few weeks .
The government will soon take decisions in the recommendation of the control free sugar industry of C . Rangarajan Committee .
The government will step ahead in phases in the direction of making the sugar industry control free .
On the demand for increasing the export tax on industrial world , he said that talks are going on with the finance ministry and very soon decision will be taken on the issue .
For the increasing production of sugar in the country he considers the contribution of cooperative sugar industries to be significant .
Not consuming the hereditary amended food products will depend on the wish of the consumer .
It will be essential for the GM food producing companies to give information regarding the GM food on the packets .
Last year the government had made law regarding this .
One of the senior officer of the ministry of consumer affairs said that in the new standard packing law it has become necessary to give the detailed information of a food packet .
It includes the weight , price , packing date and the expiry date of the product .
There are new provisions of packing -LRB- weight -RRB- in the law .
It has been enforced from 1st November , 2012 .
Alongside , the government made it mandatory to write GM on GM food packs which has been enforced from 1st January , 2013 .
With this the the companies have to write GM with bold letters on GM packs .
Because there are no constraints in the selling of GM food products in foreign .
Therefore many of the exported products from there are GM .
The finest variety of pomegranate -LRB- Bhagwa -RRB- which is demanded even in foreign .
After their initiative the farmers of Siwana and sindhari region have also planted gardens in their farms and at 172 hectares of land today pomegranate fruits are laden in the garden .
When the local peasants who were on Gujarat visit by the agriculture department saw and knew the about the production of pomegranate there , they also thought about it .
Alongside adopted the water droplet irrigation technique with the government subsidy with which the water loss is nominal .
Guava is such a fruit which is nutritional elements in abundance , despite this it is cheaper and easily available .
According to the accredited report of National Institute of nutrition , Hyderabad , the level of antioxidants in guava is much more as compared to other fruits .
If you thought that oranges is full of vitamin c then you will be amazed to know that guava contains 5 times more vitamin c as compared to oranges .
It has been strengthening our immunity system to fight against long diseases .
Regular consumption of guava with seeds cures constipation .
It strengthens digestive system if it is consumed with black salt .
` A plant worth fifty thousand rupees ` , I was surprised for sometime after hearing it .
Agricultural experts said that it is a ` bonsai ` plant .
Though it is small to see at but wonderful .
The price of the plant is as much as is its age .
This bonsai plant has become the major attraction of the flower show -LRB- nursery and landscape expo 2012 -RRB- started at the Indian agricultural research institute .
More than 100 varieties of colorful indigenous and overseas flowers have been kept in the flower expo .
People were seen to be keen towards bonsai and gardening learning methods .
A plant named folius beauty is green throughout the year .
That is why it is called evergreen .
Apart from this even if we don ` t give water to the desert roses , they do not dry .
Dr. J.P.S Dabas of the senior scientist of the Indian agricultural research institution said that Bonsai is a Japanese art which means dwarf plant .
It began from Japan .
Bonsai plants are planted in pot , whose branches and roots are regularly trimmed .
People fondly plant Bonsai in their homes and offices .
Dr. Praveen Khare told about the measures to save the cattle from diseases .
The cold and dry temperate climate of Lahaul-spiti is considered favorable for apple production because of its disease free atmosphere and geographical location .
Therefore the farmers of Lahaul-spiti are continuously getting attracted towards gardening .
The farmers and gardeners of the low regions of Patan valley had started sowing apple plants from 1980 .
Fruits and vegetables bloom during winter .
So many colorful fruits and a lot of green vegetables .
Apart from vitamin C , vitamin B complex , iron , phosphorus Sweet potato is rich in Beta carotene .
Sweet potato keeps the body warm and the consumption of Vitamin C present in it relieves from bronchitis and lung problems .
It is rich in fiber therefore apart from satisfying hunger it is also good for digestive system .
Starch , vitamins , minerals and protein are in abundance in sweet potato and it provides energy to the body .
Sweet potato also has potassium in adequate amount .
Potassium plays a significant role in reducing blood pressure .
The Central government has announced to increase the minimum support price of wheat for the current Rabi season from 65 rupees to 1350 rupees .
Seeing the bumper stock the export of 25 lakh tonnes of wheat has been approved .
Citing the tremendous increase in the input coast the farmers had demanded for at least 200 rupees increase in the MSP of wheat .
Against the assurance of Pawar the government has cheated the farmers by merely an increase of 65 rupees in the MSP of wheat .
The agricultural scientists who have successfully decoded the genome of pigeon pea have now become successful in decoding the genomes of other significant gram pulses .
With this it will be easier to make chick peas safe from insects .
The Indian agricultural research council has started preparing disease free , high yielding hereditary amended -LRB- GM -RRB- seeds of pigeon and chick peas .
Last year only the scientists had decoded the genome of chick peas .
The BT chick peas of pulses will be developed through domestic resources .
The state agricultural minister Dr . Charan Das said that for achieving the self dependence of pulses the genome seeds of pulses will be developed .
The extremely advanced Pusa Basmati by the agricultural scientists have become the source of happiness for 1509 farmers .
This variety with limited use of pesticide and high yield in less time is the most advanced variety of available Basmati at domestic and world level .
Because of its taste , flavor and best shape , Pusa basmati 1509 has become the first choice domestic and world purchasers .
The farmers are also getting rich by doing the farming of Pusa 1509 instead of traditional Basmati .
Along with getting prepared soon the new variety is capable of giving more yield .
According to Prabhu the most new varieties require less use of pesticides .
Because of the imported cheap sugar the prices are coming down quickly .
With this the heart beat of sugar industry has increased .
But the bewildered government has completely refused to do anything in this direction because of the inflation .
The finance minister expressing his angst on the rampant inflation said that currently sugar is not a special issue .
The government is ready to raise every possible step to reduce the prices .
The sugar industry organizations are shocked at this statement of Chidambaram , the finance minister .
At present there is 10 % tax on the sugar import .
While , the price of sugar has come down to 500 $  tonne in the world market .
Looking at the adequate production in Brazil more falloff of sugar prices are expected .
A total of 8 lakh tonnes of sugar has been imported till last week .
The price of sugar in Pakistan is also 5-6 rupees less as compared to India .
After this it will announce its decision regarding ban on import or export enforcing control .
This year the sugar industry has quite a lot tasted the sweetness .
There has been a steep increase in the production of this industry worth 80 thousand crore rupees .
The industry has exported sugar in large quantities .
Five crore sugarcane farmers are dependent on sugar industry .
During the last session the production of sugar production was 2.63 crore tonnes .
The second largest sugar producing country of the world , India has also exported 34 lakh tonnes sugar this year .
The beginning of 2012 brought hopes for this industry .
In January , the Prime minister elected an expert committee in the chairmanship of C Rangarajan to make sugar control free .
The committee has given affirmative recommendations to the sugar industry in October .
It includes control release system and removing debts from levy sugar .
Food minister K . V . Thomas has assured the representatives of the industry to enforce the recommendations of Rangarajan .
Agriculture minister Sharad Pawar has already supported this .
For the benefit of the industry the government had handed over the price of the ethanol to the market in November .
The farmers also got the benefits of high prices of sugar .
During this time they were paid more than 50 thousand crore rupees by the mills .
The tetchiness of monsoon during the Kharif season has affected crops .
Because of this not only the productivity of grains but their yield is also feared to be affected .
But the thing to be relieved is that it can be recompensed to quite an extent with Rabi crops .
The ministry says that in order to recompense extra land and high quality seeds are being used for Rabi crops .
The production of cotton is also expected to reduce by 18 lakh bunches .
The government has expressed its expectation that the deterioration in grain production can be compensated with Rabi crops .
In the kharif season the government has done the MSP of 15.7 % in the MSP of paddy , 28.6 % in cotton , 10-13 % in mung bean and black gram , 37 % in groundnut , more than 33.3 % in soyabean .
For this the purchase of Indian food corporation has also been increased .
Extra godowns have been arranged for grain storage .
The path of new area named descent of agriculture and developmental research has commended .
Humans did the early attempts of controlling and affecting vegetation .
Before this they get food in some amount from plants and trees directly .
Early man received some amount of food from wild animals and birds .
They started farming cleaning the forests .
They debut of tree plantation and making the wild animals their pets near the surroundings began before 800 BC .
The relationship between primary agriculture and herbage situation is contentious .
One opinion in this regard is that new grain producing economy is spread in different with directions with the infancy of mixed farming .
This infancy state was situated in fertile crescent .
One of the economy amongst this was found in the step territory of Eurasia .
There that already turned into cattle grazing and nomadic economy .
The factors of environment gave a significant contribution mechanism .
Thus they gave birth to mixed farming here .
This procedure is running since roman tradition that descent and development of farming happened in this sequence .
Firstly , hunting of wild animals , secondly accumulating wild fruits and edible -LRB- products and thirdly cattle grazing .
But now it is rarely accepted .
Another similar opinion is that farming has evolved in such big valleys where water control was required .
Few years back Babylon and other Russian scientists drove campaign throughout the world between 1916 and 1930 on the basis of which they enlisted the origin of 8 free centers very significant cultivated plants of the world .
China-It is topmost and largest free center which consists of the following hilly terrain of central-western China .
Northern - India has undoubtedly been the birth place of many tropical fruits including sugarcane , rice , many fruits and mango and many lemon-lineage plants .
Middle Asia - It includes north western Afghanistan , India , Tajikistan , western Uzbekistan , t yen-shan .
Remote east - Amongst the 83 enlisted species here were 9 vegetal species of wheat and mustard , grapes , fig , pear , cherry , almonds , walnut and alfalfa .
Mediterranean center - is the home of oat , olive and many leafy-vegetables .
Ethiopia - This region is very significant because of many varieties of wheat , sorghum , oat,millet-barley .
Southern Mexico middle America - It was the primary center of sweet potato , maize and quality cotton where 49 local species were enlisted .
Southern America - laid emphasis on the significance of high , hilly regions of 1932-33 Russian campaign of Bulgaria , Peru , Ecuador .
In the traction green infancy stage of the old seeds of farming the feudal grain system has tied the farmer or workers to the rich .
The industrial revolution was not only deeply related to the agricultural land revolution but it was dependent on that .
In 1709 BC Abraham dubby was doing the work of casting iron in coal-book dell with the help of coke .
Many kinds of reforms had to be done before casting all kinds of iron .
As the new ways of casting iron were being adopted , the cheap iron of agriculture and other industries started getting available easily .
Steam-power was also easily available .
With this industries and the subsidiary services grew rapidly .
Consequently the demand of the laborers were also fulfilled .
Even if the laborers are called from the remote areas there scarcity will be there .
As a result , more work was done regarding better farming methods .
Thus arrangements for more farms and crofts were made .
Which was a necessary condition for land reform .
The significant characteristic of new farming techniques was specialism .
More and less needs of food and clothing of the farmers were fulfilled with self sufficiency oriented farming .
Now specific crops like wheat are being produced even in low favorable regions from more favorable production area .
Consequently the production of these crops was reduced .
Growing root crops not only helped in maintaining the best practice of fertility but internal crops were achieved but the specialization of agriculture became simple .
After sometime it was considered essential to keep more livestock during winter for supplying manure in the land .
Thus the supply of milk could be made possible from the inappropriate regions of farming .
For achieving milk and fat cattle finishing was done in the favorable fertility of local climatic transportation and soil conditions .
Litchi - Litchi is a tasty fruit .
Its origin is considered to be China .
It also has the highest production in china .
The second position in world is of India .
Its plant was brought to India from Burma in 17th century .
Apart from China and India it is also grown in Vietnam , Thailand , Philippines , South Africa , Taiwan , Australia , New Zealand , Queensland and southern Florida & Hawaii , USA -LRB- Hawaii Islands -RRB- .
98 % of Litchi in India is grown in the districts of Muzaffarpur and Darbhanga in Bihar .
apart from this Litchi is grown in Dehradun of Uttaranchal , Punjab , Nainital -LRB- Gurdaspur -RRB- ; West Bengal -LRB- Hugli -RRB- and South India -LRB- lower hills of Nilgiri -RRB- .
There is excess of sucrose in Litchi .
It is used as a fresh fruit .
It is used after drying in China .
Apart from this marmalade , pickle , alcohol and squash is made from this .
Pomegranate - Among the other largest producing countries of the World are spain , Egypt , Morocco , Iran , Arab and Afghanistan .
Apart from this its gardening is also seen in Myanmar , Japan , China and California -LRB- USA -RRB- .
The gardening of Pomegranate is spread on around 1200 hectare land .
In Maharashtra its gardening is done on almost 800 hectares land .
Others states include Uttar Pradesh , Gujrat , Karnataka , Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu .
Warm environment is essential to grow sweet and tasty fruits of Pomegranate .
During the growth and ripening of fruits around 400 c temperature is appropriate .
Its juice is very tasty and energizing .
Jelly is also made from this .
Plum - Plum is a major fruit among the ancient fruits of India .
It is mentioned in the ancient writings .
Its origin is considered to be from India , Malaysia to south western China .
Among the plum producing countries , china is prominent .
The area under this fruit includes 12,000 hectares .
It is mostly found in Madhya Pradesh .
Other states include Haryana , Punjab , Bihar , Uttar Pradesh , Rajasthan , West Bengal , Gujrat , Andhra Pradesh , Assam , Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu .
The small and sour fruits of plum are dried and powdered .
These fruits are also consumed after drying and soaking .
Apart from the fresh fruits of plum , marmalade , candy , squash and sauce are also made .
Plum wood is used as fuel and for making furniture .
Fig - Its birth place is said to be Arab .
In the Mediterranean countries such as Italy , Turkey , Portugal and Algeria its farming is done in an elaborated way .
In India its farming is primarily done in Pune in Maharashtra , Shrirangpattanam in Karnataka , Lucknow in Uttar Pradesh and some parts of Gujarat .
The farming is emphasized on the outskirts of cities .
The fruit perishes soon .
Jam , syrup , Jelly etc are prepared from its fruit .
Emblica - From the commercial point of view it is cultivated in Uttar Pradesh , India .
Pratapgarh , Varanasi , Azamgarh , sultanpur , sitapur , Raibareli , bareli and nainital districts Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal are remarkable .
It is a very old fruit of India .
It is rich in ancient literature .
It is adequately mentioned in the compositions of Ramayana , Charak Samhita and Kalidas susrut Samhita .
It is also significant from religious point of view therefore we get one or two trees in every garden .
Various parts of the tree contain different kinds of medicinal values .
The amount of vitamin ` c ` in the fruits are relatively high .
Therefore various kinds of nutritive and medicinal things are prepared from these fruits .
It also contains pectin in large amounts .
The fruit of Emblica is very useful .
This is beneficial for many diseases such as diarrhea , jaundice -LRB- blood deficiency -RRB- , disapsia and cuffs etc .
This medicine is very effective for eye and stomach problems .
Wood apple - The medicinal values of wood apple have been described in Charak Samhita .
In India wood apple is grown from Himalaya to Kanyakumari .
Apart from this it is also grown in Srilanka , Bangladesh , Burma , Thailand and many other countries of south east Asia .
The fruit of wood apple is healthy and famous for medicinal values .
It has medicinal values because of mormosolin elements .
Apart from being a fresh fruit it useful in other ways also .
Food items like marmalade , toffee , squash , jam , nectar , jelly and juice and syrup are made from fruit .
Wood apple is a multipurpose fruit .
Therefore it is used in many Ayurvedic medicines .
Avocado - The origin of this fruit is Mexico of North american continent .
From the commercial point of view it is cultivated in Mexico .
In India it is cultivated in the foothills of Kallar and Barliyar regions of Bangalore , nandi and Nilgiri and Pune region of western India .
Its fruit does not ripe fully on trees .
It falls off the tree before maturing after which it ripens .
After ripening it becomes soft .
Avocado fruit is consumed fresh .
It is neither sweet nor sour to eat .
Thus it is not liked much in India .
Mulberry - The origin of black mulberry is supposed to be Iran and black mulberry is supposed to be China and Japan .
The origin of red mulberry is supposed to be North America .
While in china mulberry is cultivated for silkworm in India it is cultivated for fruits .
Apart from Japan , China and India it is also grown in Europe and America .
In almost all the regions of India mulberry is grown in large numbers .
It is cultivated in south India , Karnataka and Tamilnadu .
In many regions it is cultivated for silk production .
The fruit of mulberry perishes very soon .
The fruit should be allowed to ripe fully at the tree .
The fruits thus collected are soon sent to the market .
Very tasty jam is prepared from this fruit .
Its juice helps is throat infection and relieves from fever .
Its also helps in purifying blood .
Silkworm eats mulberry leaves with fervor .
Gooseberry-It is used as thorny fence -LRB- protector -RRB- around the garden .
Apart from India it is cultivated in South Africa and Malaysia .
Relatively less mature fruits are used for making curry and sauce .
Gooseberries are used as pickle , jelly , curry , marmalade and syrup .
Colored wine is also made from its fruits .
Dates-Dates were said to be originated in Africa or Arab of Asian continent .
Egypt -LRB- 18.5 % -RRB- , Iraq -LRB- 17 % -RRB- , Iran -LRB- 13 % -RRB- and Saudi Arab -LRB- 12 % -RRB- are among the major date producing countries of the world .
The climate of some areas of India such as Jaisalmer and Sriganganagar of Rajasthan , Kachh in Gujarat , Sirsa , Mahendra garh , Bhiwani in Haryana and Abohar and Firozpur in Punjab are appropriate for its cultivation .
Apart from eating fresh its fruits are utilized in different ways .
Its syrup is used to make jaggery and candy .
Wine is made from the raw fruits and the ripe fruits are dried to make chhuhara -LRB- date -RRB- .
The seeds of date are powdered and fed to camels and goats .
Date is a major plant of tropical desert .
Date trees start yielding fruits from 8-9 years and yields fruits for almost 200 years .
It is a significant nutritive edible element which contains adequate amounts of sucrose and protein .
The prime exporter of dates in the world is Iraq where it is densely cultivated in the valley of Dajla and Farat .
Tamarind - From the scientific name of tamarind -LRB- tamarind Indica -RRB- we know that its major places are India and countries of south west Asia .
Its legumes have a significant place among the recipes of south India .
We can find tamarind trees in the gardens here .
It legumes are used as sauce with food , for bringing a sour taste in vegetables and in the form of medicine etc . .
Its seeds , leaves etc are used various medicines .
Blackberry - The origin of blackberry is supposed to be Myanmar , India , Srilanka and Malaysia .
Natural trees of blackberries can also be found in the forests of southern Australia .
It takes around 3.5 months from flowering till the ripening of fruits .
After ripening the color of the fruits turn dark purple , tastes sweet and fragrance becomes good .
Apart from serving the purpose of eating the fruits of blackberry gives cool and freshness .
The soup of seeds are useful for reducing diabetes .
Vinegar is also prepared from the juice of fruits .
Apple - Apple is cultivated in even temperate zonal countries .
This fruit is used as a fresh fruit to eat .
The juice and cider of apple are significant .
France and Britain are major countries that produce cider from apple .
The area of warm temperate fruits in India is very less .
Amongst them , apple occupies the top position from the point of view area .
The commercial production of apple in India is done in Uttar Pradesh , Jammu and Kashmir and hilly parts of Himach .
Jam , marmalade , jelly , cider etc are prepared from the fruit .
The apple of Kashmir is considered to be the best variety amongst them .
Pear-It is the major fruit of warm temperate area .
Its place of origin is supposed to be China , Afghanistan , North-western India , Uzbekistan and eastern part of cocksess mountains .
The area of pear production in china is even more than apple production .
In India pear is grown in the hilly regions of Jammu & Kashmir , Himachal Pradesh -LRB- more than 1200 m high -RRB- and Uttar Pradesh .
Apart from this it is cultivated in the hilly regions of Nilgiri and north east .
For sending the fruits of pear in the remote markets fully mature but hard fruits are plucked from the trees .
Peach - Its place of origin is supposed to be China .
Here peach was grown before 2000 BC .
From China it was brought to middle Asia , Arab and then to brought to Europe and North America by the Spain inhabitants .
Majority of the area under its cultivation are in Nainital and Almora districts of Uttaranchal .
After plucking the fruits they are filled in wooden baskets , which are loaded in trucks and soon sent to the nearby market .
Plum - In Europe the horticulture farming is in progress for 2000 years .
Its major place is supposed to be Cocksess mountain and the area beyond cocksess .
It is cultivated in Myanmar and China .
From here only it was taken to Japan around 1500 AD .
In India Plum is grown in Jammu & Kashmir , Uttar Pradesh , Himachal Pradesh and in the Nilgiri hills of southern India .
Its fruit is used as a sweet dish .
They are eaten after cooking .
The fruits are packed and marmalade is also made .
The pulp is also used in preparing ice-cream batter , candy , bread , jelly , custard , pastry and mutton paste .
Almonds - The origin of almonds is Mediterranean region .
It is also cultivated around the area of Rumsagar .
It is cultivated in Spain , Morocco , Italy , Portugal and Algeria .
Many trees of almonds are found in the Kinnaur and Lahore regions of Himachal Pradesh .
Oil is extracted from the kernel of almond which is also called ` Badam Rogan ` .
It is used in many medicines .
Majority of the people also like to eat the kernel of raw almonds which is very healthy .
Strawberry - It was started being cultivated in 15th century .
In the European countries it was brought from Chile .
In Britain , USA and France it is cultivated in an extensive way .
In India it is cultivated in limited areas in hilly regions .
It is such a fruit which is used only fresh else it perishes very soon .
The content of vitamin c in fresh fruits is equivalent to lemon .
Because of excess of iron anemia patients are advised to consume strawberry fruits .
Apricot - Its chief place is western China .
In India its trees are found in the forests of Kinnaur district in Himachal Pradesh .
Its fruits are very tasty to eat .
The nectar of apricot are used or making wine and jam .
In Himachal Pradesh -LRB- India -RRB- , oil is extracted from the kernel of its seed and used for cooking .
Cherry - Its chief place is supposed to be west Asia .
Cherries are both sour and sweet .
Its commercial farming began from 1960 .
In India Cherry gardens are found on around 350 hectare area .
The fruits are plucked before they are completely mature .
The fruit of sweet cherries are used for eating fresh .
Marmalade and sauce is prepared from the fruit .
Further , cherry is used to make vegetables .
Raspberry - The various species are European , American , Purple , black Raspberry etc . .
European Raspberry is the indigenous plant of Europe .
The hybridization of raspberry was first begun by Dr . Brinic , the scientist of Philadelphia Pennsylvania in 1825 .
Rubias novias , a species of Raspberry is found in the Himalayas also .
Mahabaleshwar region is famous for its cultivation .
It is a very useful fruit , its each and every part is useful .
The fruits have a lot of fragrance .
It is mostly used to make various kinds of jam and syrups .
Its fruits are also used to make good wine .
The seeds and roots of raspberry are also very useful .
Roots and stem are infallible stomach medicines .
Walnut-Walnut occupies second position among fruits with kernel .
In India walnut fruits have been found in wild form since long .
Since the last few years walnut cultivation projects are being run by the Indian government .
Its major places are eastern temperate European countries .
The dry fruits of walnut are filled in sacks and stored in moisture free rooms .
They are used in food items , sweets etc . .
Persimmon-This fruit is mainly cultivated in Japan and it is considered to be the national fruit there .
Its two species are Chinese and American .
It is called ` maki ` in Japan .
In India it is cultivated in northern hilly regions , Assam in east and in south in the limited areas of Nilgiri hills .
Persimmon fruits are plucked in solid state from the trees after which they are packed and sent to the far-off markets .
Wheat is a major crop of temperate zones whose origin is supposed to be philistine .
There are evidences of thousands years related to its origin .
It is mostly cultivated till 600 latitude in northern hemisphere and till 400 latitude in southern hemisphere .
Today it is also being cultivated in warm tropical plateau and cold tropics .
In every month of the year wheat crop matures in one country or another .
Wheat contains nutritive elements in adequate amounts .
It is an energizing and digestible edible product .
Wheat is a major food in countries with temperate climate .
It has more of protein and less of starch .
It grows in many kinds of climate .
Expenditure is low on this crop .
It is cereal of significance in the world .
50-75 cm rain is good for wheat .
Steepy soil and mold soil is beneficial for this .
Mold soil is most appropriate which has equal proportion of sand and mud .
Lime is necessary for this plant .
Therefore manure of salt-peter and ammonia sulfate is mostly used .
Instruments are also necessary .
Its farming requires less number of labors .
Instruments are also used in its farming at large scale .
Where all the works including sowing-planting to harvesting all are done using machines .
Today high quality seeds and easy transportation facilities are also there .
There should not be any scope for producing more money fetching crops in wheat producing states .
That is why wheat farms are located away from big cities because more currency is gathered from the vegetables near the cities .
Government aids in the form of manures , seeds , irrigation facilities , warehouse safety tax are also economic factors .
Europe - Around 1 of the world was born in this continent .
It is the major crop of this continent .
Europe is the second wheat producing continent of the world .
Soviet Union - This is the biggest wheat producing nation of the world .
Here both spring and winter season kinds of wheat are grown .
Here the area under spring season wheat is more vivid .
The entire region is situated in the north of 25 cm rainfall .
This wheat is only grown in the irrigated regions of Central Asia .
Here massive farms of collective and cooperative farming have been built .
Yet the use of machines and fertilizers is less as compared to the United States .
Therefore here the per hectare produce is 2,600 kg .
special varieties of wheat are being tested in the country for dry and cold states .
Successful usage of agriculture have been done till 660 northern latitude .
27 % of the worlds wheat is produced in this country .
United states of America and Canada are big producers and exporters of wheat in this continent .
After Europe this continent occupies the place of wheat production .
Here also both winter and spring period of wheat are produced .
Here commercial farming is done and the credit of bringing revolutionary changes in wheat farming goes to this country .
There are wheat producing states in the same country .
Dakota is the biggest producer state .
The total area under wheat production in Missouri and Dakota are 153 hectare and 764 hectare respectively .
It is the biggest exporting country of wheat .
Canada occupies fifth position in world ` s wheat producing countries .
wheat is grown in the black soil region of Prairie .
The farming here is more extensive as compared to United states of America .
Therefore average yield per hectare is less .
This continent occupies first position in the world in terms of wheat production .
Its major producing countries are China , India , Turkey and Pakistan .
Iran and Japan are also good producers of wheat .
China - China is world ` s third largest and Asia ` s biggest wheat producing country .
The per hectare average production of wheat here is 1,500 kg .
As a consequence of high population wheat is exported here from Canada and United States of America .
India - India occupies fourth position in the world and second position in Asia among the wheat producing countries .
Here winter seasoned wheat is grown .
The per hectare average produce here is 1,500 kg .
Turkey - It is the third largest wheat producing country of the Asian continent and sixth largest wheat producing country of the world .
Wheat is produced in 32 % of the agricultural land .
This country is an exporter of wheat .
The decline of export is obvious .
Pakistan - Pakistan occupies fourth position among the wheat producing countries of Asia .
Wheat is cultivated in the valleys of Sindh river and its tributaries .
This part is irrigated through canals .
Australia - Wheat is being cultivated in the 25 % arable land .
There are big wheat farms here where there is more use of machines .
66 % of the arable land of the state and 34 % of the arable land of the country is wheat region .
Argentina - The per hectare average produce here is 1,350 kg .
The wheat of Argentina is spongy .
Therefore it can be kept into the warehouses for a long time which increases commercial price .
Wheat only is the perineum of the economy of the country .
The second largest exporting country of wheat in the world is Argentina .
The place of origin of rice are delta regions and river-valleys of south eastern Asia from where it spread to China , India and later to other countries .
Its farming is very easy .
It doesn ` t require major instruments .
Every part of the plant is useful .
It is the major food of tropical monsoon climate .
There are 700 varieties of paddy among which 100 are major .
For 63-75 days the water should be 15 cm above the plants in rice field .
Rice is grown in low rainfall regions through irrigation .
Plainly rice is cultivated on plain land and hilly rice is cultivated on hilly slopes .
It contains all the elements of food in adequate amounts .
It has less of protein and more of starch .
It is an American plant .
It was brought to Europe by Columbus .
Later it was cultivated in Asian countries .
There are various varieties .
Currently hybrid varieties have been researched that are cultivated more .
The highest produced food product in the world is corn .
It is used in both human and animal food .
It is the food of ordinary people that is why it occupies third position among the cereals .
Starch , glucose and alcohol is prepared from it .
Cardboard , paper and rayon is made from its stems .
Various food items are made from corn in the United States .
It is a plant of tropical and subtropical land .
It requires high temperature and good humidity .
The growth of most of the plant occurs at night .
Light rain shower is advantageous while growth .
The appropriate annual average rainfall is 50 cm .
Relatively low humidity and open sun light is required during ripening .
Rainwater harms the crop if stays in the field .
Nitrogen and bacteria borne loam soil is suitable for corn .
The cumulative moisture capacity of soil is significant .
The production area of corn is dependent on local demands .
The per hectare average production of the world is 2,080 kg .
United States of America - Corn is grown in a comprehensive region which densely expands from Saint Louis to the borders of Canada and from Nebraska to Ohio .
Iowa is the first and Illinois are second biggest producing states .
Because of the progress of animal husbandry the corn farming has got encouragement .
This country grows 44.5 % corn of the world .
80 % of the produce is fed to animals , 10 % is used in creating starch , glucose and the rest is exported .
Because of scientific farming the per hectare average production is 5,300 kg .
The producers of Illinois Iowa are the basis of flesh plants of Chicago .
The farmers of Ohio supply corn to the factories of sinacity and the farmers of Missouri supply corn to the factories of Saint Louis .
This country is the biggest exporter of corn .
The corn areas are away from seashore because of which the transportation cost is more .
Further here corn is exported through ships .
The biggest purchaser is India .
China - It is used for human and animal food .
Pigs are made fat with this .
The per hectare average produce here is 2,500 kg .
Brazil - It is the third largest corn producing countries of the world .
It is grown from north-east to south of the country .
It is the special food of pigs .
Its per hectare average production is 1,300 kg .
Soviet Union - It is the fifth biggest corn producing country of the world .
It is cultivated in Ukraine , Uzbekistan , Armenia and cocksess .
12 % pigs of the world are raised in this country which is equals the number of United states of America .
Majority of the corn is grown to feed pigs .
Romania - The major producing region is Balachia field .
Corn cultivation is being extended here .
It is the biggest corn producing country of Europe .
Yugoslavia - Corn is grown in the entire country .
In the western region of deep soil the production is more .
South African republic - corn is the main food of the inhabitants here .
It is fed to the pet animals and is known as milize .
The per hectare average production here is 1,000 kg .
This is the sixth largest corn producing country of the world .
It is a corn exporter country .
The major purchasers of corn are Italy , Britain and western Germany .
Mexico - This country is the seventh biggest corn producing country of the world .
Corn is grown everywhere in the country , corn is grown on 66 % of the arable land .
Nowhere in the country , corn has this much significance .
India-It is world ` s eleventh and second biggest corn producing country in Asia after China .
It is mostly grown in Uttar Pradesh , Punjab and Haryana .
Because of the publicity of irrigation , fertilizers and high quality seeds the production of corn is increasing .
Its per hectare average production is 1,130 kg .
Argentina - It is the tenth biggest corn producing country of the world .
The major place of corn is north-eastern part of Pompass .
Significant corn crop is grown in western and southern region of river Parana .
Danube basin-Corn is cultivated in the plains of this basin .
The per hectare production in Hungary basin , Europe is the most which is even more than United states of America .
The second major crop of Hungary is crop .
Other countries of Asia - Pince , Indonesia , Malaysia and turkey produce corn .
Africa - 1.2 % of the world ` s corn is produced in this continent .
Corn comes after wheat and rice in the trade of cereals .
Corn is imported in western Europe to feed animals .
Around two third of the country ` s population is engaged in farming .
It is primarily an agricultural dominant country .
The field for farming is significant here , yet its condition is not good .
Notionally arable land in India is even more than 18 crore hectare from which around 16 crore hectare is cultivated .
Thus there is still scope for increasing cultivation in nearly 2 crore hectare area , but most of the remaining land is inferior .
According to the weather , crops grown in India have two parts - Kharif and Rabi .
Kharif crops are sown in the beginning of rainy season and harvested in the beginning of winter .
They include millet , paddy , oats , cotton , maize , jute , groundnut etc .
Rabi crops are sown at the end of rainy season and harvested in the beginning of summer .
The point is that rabi crops are oat , wheat , lentil , flax and mustard .
Rice , wheat etc are cereals but cotton , jute and sugarcane provide raw materials for industries .
Farmers grow them to sell therefore they are called manufacturing or commercial crops .
India is the chief producer of pulses , -LRB- peanut , sesame , mustard , etc. -RRB- , tea , spices -LRB- ginger , cardamom , black pepper -RRB- and jute and India ranks second in the production of rice , wheat , sugar cane and third in the production of cotton .
Rice shares around 42 % of India ` s total cereal .
Here Paddy is grown in 25 % of the total arable land .
India ranks second among the rice producing countries of the world .
In India the land under rice cultivation is the most but the production is backward due to less production per hectare .
India produces around 22 % of world ` s rice .
But it is spent in meeting the need of the country .
Thick variety of rice or the rice which is prepared easily is sown by sprinkling .
But most of the paddy plants are prepared first in beds and then they are plucked and planted in the fields specially prepared .
The paddy is sown in mud and it grows in water logged fields for few weeks .
As the ripening times approaches the requirement of water reduces .
But during October when it starts bearing seeds then water is required for the nourishment of seeds .
Therefore October rain is significant for paddy .
In India the favorable land for the cultivation of paddy is in West Bengal , it has the highest production .
Paddy in the country is mostly cultivated in the Ganges delta and middle Ganges plains , Mahanadi delta and valleys of tributaries , valleys of Brahmaputra and sutlej from where India receives around 75 % or rice .
There is great scope for growth of rice production in India and attempts are being made in this direction and farmers are being provided with improved seeds , manures and insecticides .
The per hectare rice production in Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu is generally double of Uttar Pradesh , Bihar and Madhya Pradesh .
The major reason is adequate irrigation facility through canals for rice cultivation in the delta region of eastern coast .
Sugarcane is the major commercial crop of world .
It is the basis of sugar industry and it is primarily cultivated in India .
Sugarcane is also among the the significant cash crops of India .
The area under Sugarcane cultivation in India is highest in the world .
It is world ` s second biggest cane producing country of the world .
India produces around one-fourth of world ` s sugarcane .
Here sugarcane is being cultivated in the plains of Ganges since ancient times and according to some scholars India is the origin of sugarcane from where it has spread to other parts of the world .
Irrigation is required due to less rainfall but sugarcane becomes less sweet due to excess rainfall .
Cold and chilly weather is also harmful for sugarcane .
Dry and delicate temperature is beneficial during harvesting .
For sugarcane cultivation , wet jwalamukhi and red soil should have sufficient strength to maintain the humidity of soil .
Wet mold soil , black cotton soil and dark red mold soil are the most appropriate for this .
Sugarcane pulls a large section of soils fertility in itself .
Therefore there is need to put in manures and fertilizers in large amounts .
93 % of the land under sugarcane farming in India is irrigated .
The sugar industry of India was destroyed due to this competition and India became a major importer of sugar .
There has always been growth in the per hectare production due to consistent increase in scientific methods , manures , irrigation facilities .
Except the hilly parts of Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh sugarcane is grown in almost all the parts of the country but it is mostly grown in upper and middle Ganges plain and irrigated regions of Haryana .
The warm climate of south India is the most favorable for sugarcane .
Therefore the sugarcane grown here are thicker and the per hectare production as compared to North India is more .
The soil here is less fertile than the soil of Ganges and it needs more manure .
Sugarcane is a crop of longer duration .
It stays in the field for around 12 months .
Adsali sugarcane is of best variety , its production is more .
The per hectare production of sugarcane in India is very less as compared to foreign .
The major factors are lack of ideal climate for the growth of sugarcane in India , thin sugarcane , unscientific agriculture , small fields and lack of manure .
sugarcane is primarily used for jaggery , khandsari and sugar production .
India is the major exporter of tea .
India only is the major producer of tea in the world and our country is only the biggest consumer of tea .
China is only supposed to be the place of origin of tea though in Assam also wild plants of tea were seen growing during 1823 .
The responsibility of growing it is mostly in the hands of big companies which prepare tea for the market in their factories apart from running the gardens .
High temperature and more rainfall is required for tea farming .
Long dry and extreme cold season both are harmful for tea .
Tea plant can not bear harsh sunlight .
Therefore shady trees are also grown along with tea plants .
It requires cheap and skilled labors and large numbers because tea leaves are picked by hands .
Tea is cultivated in big gardens whose size ranges from 10 hectares to 400 hectares .
80 % of the land under tea in India is in Assam and Bengal and the rest are in Tamil Nadu and Kerala .
Majority of the tea gardens are located in Assam and West Bengal .
The wet soil here is deep and extremely fertile .
The job of leaf picking in the region is done by skilled women who have basically gone to work in the tea gardens of Assam from Chhotanagpur region .
West Bengal ranks second in terms of tea production .
But the tea farming is not so extensive here and it half of the tea land of Assam .
All the tea gardens in the districts of Darjeeling , Jalpaigudi and Kooch Vihar are restricted .
Majority of the tea gardens are found in Duar from where around 75 % of the production west Bengal takes place .
Here the gardens are small and their number is more .
The tea purchasers in India are from Britain , Germany and other countries of Europe and countries of western Asia .
In all these countries the Indian tea faces tough competition from Kenya and Srilanka . ?
In order to re-establish in its previous markets India has to increase both the quantity and quality of its tea and reduce the cost of expenditure in production .
The most important region of producing cotton has gone to Pakistan ` s side as Pakistan has come into existence yet the land under cotton cultivation in India is more .
21 % of the land under cotton and 16 % of the cotton production region of the world is in India .
Cotton is supposed to the plant of subtropical climate .
Extreme cold weather is harmful for it .
Cotton doesn ` t require heavy rains .
In India cotton is primarily grown in the regions of 50 to 100 cm rainfall .
At least 50 cm rainfall is utmost important but for good production suitable tropical distribution is much more important than amount of rainfall .
Water logging in soil is harmful for the plants therefore such soil is required which has low water current .
If there is sufficient rainfall in the region of black soil before sowing cotton then rainfall is hardly required at the time of cotton growth .
The cultivation of cotton especially sowing takes place in the month of April-May .
Many labors are required at the time of picking cotton .
The quality of cotton depends on the length of fiber .
The more is the length of the fiber , the best is the cotton and the more fine yarn and fabric can be prepared from it .
Therefore the production of cotton with long and medium fibers is growing .
The farming of foreign cotton is not getting much success in the regions of black soil .
Therefore only indigenous variety could grow there .
In Punjab and Haryana it is above 400 kg but it is only 120 kg in Maharashtra .
It is also required to decrease the production cost of Indian cotton .
The average production of cotton in India is 300 kg .
These countries have developed new scientific methods and new varieties of seeds and are utilizing them .
The farmers have not been much successful in using the new seeds developed so far in India in an extensive and economical way .
The price of Indian cotton is more than international cotton .
Efforts are being made to bring in the use of B . T. cotton seeds in order to increase the per hectare produce of cotton in India .
After the partition of India because of the cotton areas of western Punjab and Sindh being taken into Pakistan the production of cotton in India reduced to a large extent .
The amount of import has reduced due to the increase in production of the country and because of the increase in farming of cotton with long fibers .
But along with this there has been persistent fluctuation in the annual production .
There is fluctuation in the annual production according to the weather .
India exports a bit of best quality cotton of long and short fibrous , but the country still lacks cotton of medium and long fibers .
Because of the unhealthy relations between Pakistan and India , India had to face a lot of difficulty in getting jute from Pakistan .
Hence India tried to speedily increase jute production and within 15-20 years there was increase in the production of jute in India .
Recently because of the lack of demand for jute there has not been increase in area and production .
It is sown between March and May .
Its farming is basically done in the delta of river Ganges and valley of river Brahmaputra .
Here the fertile soil brought by rivers is found which remains new and fresh because of the floods .
Jute is sown in West Bengal during April-May and it becomes ready by August-September .
But the time for sowing in Assam and Bihar is during March-April , and during May-June in Orissa .
After getting prepared the jute plants are cut , rotten in water and the fibers are separated .
Because of its specialty the region with plenty of surface water sources provides pervasive base to the crop and the industry .
The major producer of jute is West Bengal where around 2 of Indian jute region is found and from where 70 % production is procured .
Apart from warm & humid climate and fertile delta soil , here cheap labor is also available .
In Bihar it is basically cultivated in the plains of Mahananda and Kosi in the districts Katihar , Purnea and Saharsa .
Bihar grows around 13 % of India ` s jute .
The per hectare production in Bihar is less than Bengal .
Assam grows around 10 % of India ` s jute .
India basically exports goods made of jute .
India ranks first in the production of jute in the world while it ranks second among jute industries of the world .
The major cereals are rice , wheat and millet and maize and pulses come after that .
Rice states are spread in those parts of the country where the annual rainfall is more than 100cm .
Along with rice in West Bengal and Valley of Assam , tea on hilly slopes and jute on fertile land are important .
apart from rice the place of millets comes in the plateau and hilly parts of Chota Nagpur , Orissa and neighboring Andhra Pradesh .
Apart from rice in the coastal plains of Tamil Nadu , the major crops in northern part are maize and groundnut and millet and cotton in the southern part .
Wheat states are located in the north west of India .
The annual rainfall here is less than 60 cm and the soil is fertile .
Rabi crops are more important in the state .
cotton and sugarcane are significant among the cash crops .
Fruits especially apples are significant in the Himalayan region .
The soil in the plains rocky regions are either red or black cotton soil .
Apart from millet , wheat and oil seeds are significant in western Rajasthan .
Groundnut and cotton in the kathiyavad region of Gujarat very significant among the cash crops .
Especially in Kathiyavad groundnut is the major crop .
In the entire region millet , cotton and groundnut are three significant crops , and apart from them wheat is also significant in the northern parts .
Tobacco is significant in the Gantur region of Andhra Pradesh .
The major crops are maize and millet .
The forests are burnt here to clean the land for farming .
The per hectare production of every crop in India is less than world average .
The per hectare production of rice in India is 2 of Australia and less than half of Japan and Italy .
The reserve bank has expressed its concern over the decreasing development rate in the annual agricultural report .
The rate of agricultural development was 4.4 % during 80s which remained to 3.2 during 90s and at present has fallen to 2 . 3 % .
The meaning of falling economic rate is that agricultural production is increasing but the development rate is persistently decreasing .
The Reserve bank has blamed the falling investment in agricultural sector by the government for this situation .
3.4 % of country ` s income during 70s was being spent on the basic agricultural facilities such as canal and seed research but currently it is restricted to 2 . 6 % .
The Reserve bank has cautioned the government to increase the government investment in agriculture to maintain high growth rate in agriculture .
The anxiety is Reserve bank is right .
Agricultural production will increase with increase in investment .
The income of a farmer is determined by the coefficient of production and price .
The reason behind the worsening condition of farmers is reduction in the price of agricultural products .
Though it seems that the price of agricultural products are increasing , for example 20 years back the price of wheat was 5rs and currently it is 12rs and during the same time the price of a car has increased from 55000 Rs . to 220000 Rs . .
Which means that there has been four time increase in the goods of the industry while the agricultural goods has increased 2.5 times .
The basic reason of downfall in the price of agricultural products is deficient increase in the world population because of which there is ordinary increase in the expenditure of cereals .
A person can eat 5-10 chapatis a day but he can travel in many cars .
Thus the demand of agricultural products is limited .
Agricultural production is consistently increasing .
Forests are being cut to build farms .
There has been increase in the production of grains due to new hybrid variety of seeds .
Irrigation has developed by building canals .
The demand of cereals is limited while the supply is increasing .
with this the price of agricultural products are falling in world markets .
In such a situation the government should have sheltered the domestic market of agricultural products and should have artificially increased the prices so that the farmers could fill their stomach .
The farmers could have been inspired to increase the production inspired by the high prices with which the food security of the country could also be ensured .
The rich countries have done the same thing to maintain their food security .
They are providing subsidies to their farmers in large numbers with which their farmers are producing in large numbers .
Because of the limited population the large production is being consumed in their country .
The production cost of rich countries is more yet they are exporting .
The cost of production in India is low yet we are importing it .
In this perspective , the Reserve bank says that the government investment on basic agricultural facilities should be increased to maintain the development rate of agriculture .
This policy is absolutely fine , provided the increased production is exported .
Then our food security will be maintained with increased production .
Also the domestic prices will remain high and the income of our farmers will increase by exporting surplus production .
For this it is necessary for the government to give subsidy on export of agricultural products .
The result of agricultural investment is opposite due to lack of export subsidy .
Production is increased due to investment in agriculture .
Thus the price of agricultural products fall .
Consequently farmer ` s income falls and despite high production farmers are compelled to commit suicide .
The has been so many investments in the basic facilities during the last 60 years .
Despite these investments we have to import wheat , pulses and edible oil .
The reason the falling prices .
The government should increase the investment as per the suggestions of the Reserve bank but at the same time it should also arrange for the export of extra production .
Unfortunately , the government is moving in the opposite direction .
The investment in agriculture is being reduced and the import is being increased .
W.T.O talk between U.S. , European Union , India and Brazil has failed .
It was an agricultural issue .
America had demanded that India should remove the security being given to the agricultural products .
By reducing the imports of agricultural products by India America ` s farmers will get the market of apples , almonds , wine etc .
Therefore America is demanding that India should open its agricultural market for import .
In contrast , India demands that U . S . should reduce the subsidies given to their farmers .
American farmers are making the production expensive .
Yet they sell cheap goods in India because they are getting subsidy in large numbers .
Because of the lack of consent on this issue the talk has been canceled .
Some Indian scholars believe that instead of sticking on agriculture India should adopt a flexible way .
They say that our agriculture is unsuccessful .
Our cost of production is usually more .
That is why we have to protect the farmers with cheap imports .
This is true that American farmers are selling cheap goods because of subsidy but other countries are getting cheap goods from us without subsidy .
For example the palm oil of Malaysia is cheap and our mustard and groundnut oil is getting expensive .
Thus we should concentrate on service sectors .
We are at number one position in terms of service sectors .
In such a situation making agriculture a major issue is like saving a sinking boat .
On the other side we are powerful in service sectors .
In our culture , emphasis is laid on the development of growth .
That is why our engineers are successful .
Thus we should suffer some loss in agriculture but concentrate on the emerging opportunities of service sectors .
The problem is that the contribution of agriculture in country ` s economy has been declining steadily .
90 % of our income came from agriculture during independence .
Today only 19 % is coming from agriculture .
But 60 % people are dependent on this 19 % .
The boat of agriculture is obviously sinking but large numbers passengers have boarded it .
Before letting the ship sink it is necessary to make the arrangements for the passengers to sit in the flight .
Therefore agriculture can not be abandoned before creating 3 crore employments in service sectors .
It is also uncertain that employments would be created in service sectors in large numbers .
The scope for employment in services like software , call center , music , editing , research , translation , banking , insurance , transportation , tourism seem to be limited .
The government should soon calculate on this matter .
We should see that out of 30 crore agricultural laborers , in which service sector the 20 crore be engaged and how much time will this transition take .
Further steps should be taken soon to achieve this transition .
Previously country capital subsidy plan was in function .
The government used to give subsidies to establish new industries .
Thus the expansion of subsidy service sector will take time .
Till then we should postpone W.T.O talk .
There are rumors that other developing countries are pressurizing India to take the negotiations ahead .
India is capable in service sector , China in manufacturing and Saudi Arabia in oil .
Every country must develop its capacity in which it is leading .
The development of this capacity will take time .
Thus at present it is good to postpone the W.T.O talks .
It is necessary that the given time should be utilized in the development of ones capacity .
While pronouncing the word ` farmer ` in English or ` kisaan ` in Hindi an image of a man emerges in the thought of people .
The focus of discussion of farmer related problems is generally on male farmers .
The loss of this thought is suffered by the women associated with farming and associated sectors -LRB- animal husbandry , fish farming , forestry and nursery .
The total participation of women in farming sector work is 40 % .
Among the total male workers working in agriculture sector today , there are 53 % men and 75 % women .
85 % of women among rural women workers do various work associated with agriculture .
In the agriculture sector women are engaged in work right from sowing seeds to playing the role of farm manager .
Women are the axis of agriculture .
But their significant role was never acknowledged .
Possibly that s why the right of women in agricultural is asset is almost none and despite high dynamics they get very less wages as compared to men .
Looking at such kind of gender discrimination and the international nature of agriculture the national commission for women has prepared a draft named ` National Policy for women in agriculture ` with the objective to attract the attention of agriculture policy makers towards the needs and problems of women related to agriculture .
In the tactical document prepared by the Swaminathan comission , significant concerns associated with women farmers and agriculture sector has been ignored .
Consequently the National commission for women initiated this looking at the various avenues of agriculture in the contemporaneity scenario .
Special emphasis was laid on shared land lease in agricultural asset in the national policy .
Registering the agricultural land in the name of both the couple and lodging it in governmental records have been strongly advocated in the policy .
It should be noted that the national commission for women had sent a suggestion to the Swaminathan commission to incorporate the shared lease issue in the layout of national farmer ` s policy named Jai Kisaan .
The government has been recommended to work steadily on shared lease in the national farmer policy .
Food , special education of women and arts have not been accepted in the national farmer policy .
It reflects in the national farmer policy prepared by the former well known agricultural scientist M . S . Swaminathan the chairman of National farmer commission , it has been said in the draft of national women ` s commission .
While according to the draft prepared by the national commission for women the traditional knowledge of women regarding seed and biological diversity can prove to be profitable .
Their knowledge should be acknowledged and it should be used in the agricultural research .
Transforming the male dominant agricultural scenario in our country is not that simple .
The bureaucracy of agriculture department in not sensitive towards women .
Their work provides service to the entire agricultural community but they pay more attention towards the male workers and in such a situation women are ignored .
The agricultural system does not take interest in the problems of women .
Meera Swaminathan the wife of Dr . M. S . Swaminathan in 1999 prepared an 18 hour coursework based on gender issues in earning agriculture and rural living .
The motive behind this is to sensitize the students of agriculture colleges towards the agriculture and rural structure to understand the perspective of women but despite these many years no favorable answer has been received from anywhere .
Prime Minister Dr . Manmohan Singh has announced a package of 25000 crore rupees of agricultural sector .
the states will get this money in the form of center assistance for the next four years .
For this the agriculture ministry and the planning commission will prepare an elaborate program in the coming two months .
In the concluding remarks of the 53rd meeting of National development council -LRB- NDC -RRB- held last days the Prime minister approved a ten point proposal for agriculture sector of NDC before this announcement .
It includes food security mission , growth in cereal production , increasing agriculture investment , speeding marketing reforms , new conduct of fertilizer subsidy and strengthening elaborated structure .
In the meeting the Prime minister said that the center is ready to increase the investment but the states should also make efforts at their respective level .
This investment should reach the ground level so as to have better results .
He said that very soon a Food Security Mission will be launched to stop the dependence on food import .
He said that strict decision has to be taken to achieve four per cent growth in agriculture .
Further , there should be a periodic review to implement them .
He asked the finance minister to bring all the farmer organization within preview of debt system in four years .
While the states were asked to prepare a blueprint of investment on the basis of local demands as per the plans , production and increase in productivity .
Further need for dual strategy was mentioned on the basis of meteoric and aims of coming 4-5 years .
Denying the cutting of food subsidy the Prime minister said that the farmers have to change the current subsidy structure to gain more profit .
The supply of fertilizers , water , debts , seeds , technique and machinery everything will be ensured .
talking about the demand for more resources for the irrigation of the states he said that the planning commission will consider it .
In the ten-point proposal there has been agreement on increasing the wheat production by 80 million tonnes , rice by 20 million tonnes rice and pulses by one million tonnes .
The NDC approved proposal includes the matter of more money being given by the center for meteoric irrigation facility .
Majority of the states in the meeting put forth the demand of providing more money by the center and reducing the interest rate on debts for the farmers and relieving debts .
Possibly first time in the history of the country an eighteen day agriculture movement named ` Seed Satyagrah journey ` was run last days which aimed at awaring the farmers and saving their traditional agricultural benefits .
In 1917 in Champaran -LRB- bihar -RRB- , during the English rule in India Nation ` s father Mahatma Gandhi ran a Satyagrah movement against the exploitation of indigo farmers .
From such a historical land Dr . Vandana Shiva who did an agitation for the women and environment had started a 18 day said seed satyagrah journey in the convenorship of her organization ` Nav Dhanya ` in which the farmers of Uttarakhand , Bihar , Jharkhand and Rajasthan had participated .
In the president ` s accomplished journey at mausoleum Rajghat the participants took the oath of ` seed sway and food security ` .
The suspicion of ` Seed Satyagrah journey ` is wide ranged .
As the world today has shrunk to a global village , profit and loss have become like a communicable disease .
Agriculture is also affected by it .
All the international organizations running under the influence of developed countries are not only exploiting the developing and poor countries by any means but also wish to keep them in the same condition .
Imposing foreign seeds instead of traditional seeds is the basic part of this conspiracy .
If a country of community captures the agriculture seeds of the world then it can not be said to be a world victory .
It is necessary to remind in the context that an ex politician of America , Henry Kissinger had said that if we control the food grain of the world then we can also control our population .
There are two basic reasons behind the farmer suicides in the country - the first is that we almost completely left traditional seeds and farming and the second is despite knowing the world dangers government has not preserved agriculture .
It is also not less surprising that only 57 million ha area out of the total 190 million ha cropped area of country is irrigated .
Traditionally , there is such a diversity of agriculture in the country that farmers can not remain hungry .
46 out of the total of 60 kinds of world ` s soil -LRB- clay -RRB- are found here , where every kind of crop can grow .
We also have six season here .
In contrast abroad usually there a similar kind of weather and a typical kind of soil .
Therefore our agriculture can not depend on the seeds of that place .
Our traditional seeds include hundreds of varieties of seeds like Paspalum scrobiculatum , maize , millet , paddy , lentil , pigeon pea , sorghum for which natural rain is sufficient .
There is stopgap produce despite no rainfall .
Our indigenous seeds are according to the weather here and they do not get infected by insects and diseases while the treatment and keeping of foreign seeds costs a lot .
It is the conspiracy of the multinational companies to refrain the Indian farmers from the production of their seeds , saving and commutation .
In the current crisis situation of agriculture we have to determine whether our priority is to stop suicides by conserving and preserving traditional agriculture or adopting slavery and so called export by using hybrid .
The Sayagrah journey of Gandhi Satyagrah Ashram , Bhitarwa -LRB- champaran -RRB- should move on .
The policy of our traditional agriculture and maximum use of labors can only make the country happy .
The mechanization policy can only make the country happy .
Mechanization will only fill the deed box of some people , it will not feed the poor .
Western countries and we have every kind of social and geographical differences .
Therefore we are incomparable .
The population is less there therefore machines are their compulsion .
Our population is more therefore human labor is essential .
In the Indian folk tradition there is immense intellectual knowledge related to vegetation , herbs cow-dung , cow-urine , minerals , juice-science .
Thousands of ideas benefiting human body from plants and animals are easily available in canons like Ayurveda , Yajurveda , Bhavprakash etc .
Because of the carelessness of Indian government anybody is free to get a patent from these ideas .
Because of this carelessness our patent on Neem , Basmati rice and turmeric went to foreign and we could not do anything .
After getting the patent of Neem some multinational companies of America and Japan have enslaved our intellect right by expressing their intellect right on various insecticides , biochemicals and medicinal values .
Neem has been a priceless asset of India that is why our sages began a tradition of planting it in house yard .
Some companies have made turmeric also their prey .
Thus Basmati rice the gift of Punjab has the medicinal value of keeping food channels healthy but we do not have right even on this .
A similar buggering is being carried with Indian seeds and our government is quiet and may be its intentionally quiet .
Genetically modified seeds are not only destroying our crops but also tremendously ejecting harmful effects .
The bacteria put in such kinds of seeds grow half-breed bacteria or virus which are giving birth to many kinds of unknown diseases .
Recently information was sought by the green peas organization regarding the effects of GM seeds on GM brinjal , lady ` s finger , mustard and rice crops .
After examination it was known that the GM seeds are poisonous which are adversely affecting human health and also harming the agricultural land .
The central government is considering in amending patent law .
Under this law the drug companies get the right to sell new drugs for 20 years at their desired prices , the central government is considering that the patent be given only on original research .
Patent should not be given on ordinary research or on the new formulation of old drugs , such as the patent on paracetamol , the drug that reduces fever has been ended .
If sugar is put in paracetamol tablets to make it sweet then it can again be patented , giving patent on sweet paracetamol will fetch sole right to the applicant company to make this medicine for the next 20 years .
The common intelligence says that putting sugar with paracetamol can not be called an invention .
The government wants to curb such kinds of ordinary inventions but in the W.T.O trips negotiations it has been said that every kind of inventions will be given patent .
Therefore the government is hesitating for such an amendment .
The government had elected a committee in the chairmanship of R . A. Maleshkar to consider on this issue .
The committee was asked to speak whether giving patent to original inventions would be in accordance to trips or not ? subject is significant .
This kind of a system ha been lodged by a drug company in Chennai High court .
The government has not given patent on anti cancer drugs .
The government says that all the elements of the drug were available during the past and they have again been presented for patent with ordinary amendment .
The Mashelkar committee took the decision that the ordinary inventions should also get patent otherwise it will violate the trips law .
The committee argued that currently in India most of the research works are not original but of ordinary kind .
If there will be ban on patenting ordinary inventions then the Indian companies will lag behind .
The Mashelkar committee gave more importance to achieving research skills by the Indian drug companies and less importance to the ill effects of high prices of the medicines on the citizens .
Whether the Indian companies progress for a long time or not , the Indian citizens will definitely suffer adverse effects immediately .
It is fortunate that the Supreme court of America has rejected the worries of Mashelkar committee .
The system is that patent will only be given for pure research .
The American company Teliflex added two previous inventions .
The Supreme court has said that patent can not be given at this invention because it does not have original discovery .
The uses thus incorporated can be normal and they can not be called invention .
The patent law of America has been revised with this decision .
Until now there was arrangement for the applicant to just show that he has discovered a new technique or thing .
The investigation of the depth of newness was not necessary .
Even if the newness was simple in its normal way yet it was made patent .
Patent law is the basis of prosperity of the rich countries .
Currently more 90 % patents are there with the rich countries .
They can earn huge profit by selling us these patented goods at high price .
There are two ways in front of us .
One way is that we can be a part of their unrighteous act and encourage our companies that they should also receive patent by ordinary reforms and get high price from the citizens .
The other way is to make efforts to change the patent law .
If it is essential to give the patent of common reforms under trips rules then trips law itself should be dismissed .
We should not be a part of ill behavior of the rich countries and make efforts to destroy their wrong behavior .
The irony is that our scientists are encouraging the drug companies because our companies would flourish in their shelter .
Now the time has come to make plans for combating personal calamities apart from natural calamities .
This step can prove to be effective for combating farmer suicides .
Some people believe that because of debt relief plan financial indiscipline will increase among the farmers and there will be increase in number of farmers who intentionally do not pay the debt .
Here it has to be made clear whichever discipline it is , it depends on the mind and inner self of an individual .
Those who are sensitive towards their image in society do not violate discipline in common conditions .
The second thing is that agricultural business is different from trade and industries .
Here a farmer needs to invest in every season and if his record in bank is alright then he will keep getting the facilities of the bank .
During the past three years the UPA government has made many successful efforts to change the fate of the farmers and rural India .
Agriculture is now among the priorities of the government .
Few days back a package worth 25 thousand crore rupees was announced on the issue .
Agricultural debts are being given in large amounts .
Many reforms have been done in the agricultural marketing sector .
Farming is not beneficial from economical point of view for the small holdings therefore policies regarding promoting corporate farming are essential .
The 21st century has begun with the new challenges in the area of maintaining food security .
The major challenges are - climatic change , the changing nature of farms because of fuel production due to high prices of petroleum based fuel , damage to the required ecology for agricultural progress and incessantly increasing insecticides .
As far as the question on climatic change is concerned there are few worrying aspects like increasing temperature , drought due to decreasing rains , increasing cases of floods , increasing water level due to melting of snow cover of arctic and antarctic region .
The increasing amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere has especially provided few opportunities in gardening .
Research should be especially initiated To face these opportunities and challenges .
Another area which needs attention is including women in the mainstream of technology and its publicity .
Here there is tremendous scope for starting science revolution for women in science .
It is seen that in all the convocation ceremonies in the colleges generally females top .
Women have received the maximum number of medals and women lead other areas of educational identity .
Despite this in the life after studying they do not remain fit to contribute up to that extent what they can actually give or what they themselves expect to give .
In the long history of Indian science congress only few women have been appointed as chairperson .
For example there are many home science colleges and women colleges in our country .
All these institutions should associate the nutrition , food , science and primary agricultural products to the nearby science and technology parks for value culture .
Further we need to pay attention on science subjects for women .
There is tremendous scope for the growth of production , income , balanced development of crops , animal husbandry , sea and pond fish rearing , agriculture by making the rural women technically able .
The future of the agriculture of our country will depend on the steps we take to make the rural women technically and scientifically efficient .
Today we are celebrating environment day in such a condition when along with water-forest-land there is danger on our social environment also .
The temperature of the earth is increasing because of global warming while the fire of dissatisfaction is flaring up our social environment .
For our needs we have cut trees , ruined mountains , did not leave the river water fit for drinking or bathing .
Some people say that it is the duty of the experts to save environment .
Or the government can save the environment by making big plans .
Experts and government can certainly play significant role in this but being a common citizen we can also do a lot of things .
For example we can obviously plant one tree every year or use public transport instead of private at least once in a week .
If one billion people every day save even one mug of water then this quantity can be big .
We can save the nature from getting suffocated by using paper envelops instead of using polythene .
Further they also do the work of keeping the social environment peaceful and beautiful .
It would be little when we are proud of the Green Revolution that came in the seventh decade of the last centu .
People still remember that once every year there remained lack of bundles .
If you had gone to the village during that time you would have seen that except few farmers almost everybody had no grains .
They all worked as labors in farms and they lived with the little grain what they got in return of laboring .
There condition was more pathetic during the months of the year when there was less work for farm labors .
During those days when the people where fed up of the lack of food , leading insulted life , a terrific breeze of revolution had slowly started flowing .
During the same time Green revolution came in the leadership of a great agriculture scientist Doctor Norman Borlaug .
Indian scientist Swaminathan was also there with him .
The production of crops was too much .
Wheat was started being grown where only rice used to grow .
But since the 15 years some undesirable consequences of the Green Revolution are beginning to come up .
Punjab which was once the most fertile state is badly trapped today in its grip .
All the groundwater which was accumulated for lakhs of years has been pulled out for irrigation .
According to the Saudi ` s only one percent of the area of their country is arable but it is the sixth biggest food exporter of the world .
While some people suggest products made from neem to reduce the use of insecticides , others are busy in making plants of such genes from which insects are allergic .
One more revolution is approaching slowly where all this will happen .
The marginal and small farmers who made India independent in the production of food grains are now disable .
The farmers have broken down not from economical point of view but from psychological point of view .
The figures of farmers suicide say this .
The farmers who increased the production and productivity are not getting appropriate price of their produce , rather the prices have fallen .
During the same time the rate of essential goods like manure , seeds , pesticide etc increased .
Due to adverse climate , the crops were spoilt and the income decreased all the more and the pressure of debts increased .
In order to save the farmers from this condition and to make them economically strong the NDA government formed a six membered national farmer commission in the chairmanship of Sompal .
The government changed as the commission started its work .
The new UPA government reelected the commission in the chairmanship of M . S. Swaminathan , an agriculture expert and the farther of green revolution .
The Swaminathan commission presented around five reports during November , 2004 to October , 2006 .
In the five reports of 2000 pages , there are around 200 recommendations for the development of farming and farmers .
Its most significant recommendation is that the minimum support price of farmer ` s produce should be 50 % more than the cost incurred .
Therefore the government has increased the minimum support price of wheat from 650 rupees to 750 rupees .
Thus by giving 100 rs bonus wheat , there has been 30 % price growth as the minimum support price of wheat has increased from 650 rupees to 850 rupees  quintal .
The commission has recommended that the farmers should get the debt at 4 % interest rate .
currently they have to give 9-10 % interest .
The cost of manure , seeds and insecticide is 50 % of the to total cost of production .
The commission has recommended that by encouraging biological farming their cost will decrease and the income will increase .
The agriculture scientists say that there is not much difference in the production .
Biological farming is being encouraged in the European union countries since 1990 .
The production and income of the farmers doing biological farming will increase if they get 3500 to 4000 rupees .
Due to more amount of cotton and sugarcane production for the last 3-4 years as compared to the demand , their income has decreased as the value f cotton and sugarcane has fallen down .
The commission has recommended that there should be direct contact among cotton and garment mills .
It is essential to fix the price and demand via single medium for the cotton producing farmers .
Often the sugarcane producing farmers do not get money by selling sugarcane because the sugar mills have suffered loss .
sugar , electricity , liquor and paper are made from sugarcane .
But the farmers get benefits only from the price of sugar .
They do not get anything from other profits .
It should also be considered and the farmers should get more price for the sugarcane .
Three and a half crore farmers produce sorghum , millet and maize .
The demand for its production is decreasing , they don ` t get the reasonable price and due to lack of management of its purchase and selling the income and the production of these farmers is decreasing .
Millet and maize are appropriate from the point of view of health .
The commission has recommended to use this produce in the form of ` nutritive grain ` in order to improve the condition of farmers .
The soybean association of America helps in increasing the income of farmers by selling soybean and the eatables prepared from it .
