The purpose of this book is to manifest that art which is a means of entertainment of our country ` s rural society , who has a very popular place in the Indian minds .
Actually , Swang or Nautanki is a popular form of folk-drama .
This is also presented in the form of a kind of group acting or group dance in which there is abundance of male actors .
In this , male-female actors act in pairs , dance-sing and sing songs full of fun-humour .
Along with them , the musicians , picking some touching line or sentence , beat the drum , majira and kettle-drum loudly in the same rhythm .
Dance , songs , rhythm and dialogues are predominant in these Swangs .
Their stage is open , but there is no restriction or formality about this stage .
The Swang-performers show their Swangs in turns .
In this way , Swangs continue through the nights in villages .
Probably , Swangs are also organised for weddings , birth-celebrations , festivals , harvesting and fund raising for public places like Dharmashalas , wells , schools , etc . .
May be Swang and Nautanki are synonymous .
But scholars consider them different .
According to them , Nautanki is also an important form of folk-drama , in which , unlike Swang , the stage is made of a curtain and the actors come from the backstage or from the ground from among the audience .
In this , the role of females is played by females .
In this , the musicians sit on one side of the stage and the actors enter the stage from the other side .
The plots of Nautanki or Swang are mostly full of romance , bravery and courageous events .
Our rural populace gets to know about the special stories from these Swangs and Nautankis .
Art is the emotive expression of nature and life .
The signification of truth lies in expressing it in a beautiful and effective manner .
Only art can save from life ` s materialism which is putting a cover on our inner consciousness .
Only that can complete our life by expanding and disciplining our emotions .
In our life there are two clear spheres of development of this art - one civil life and other public life .
Thus , the two forms of art which develop independently inspite of influencing each other are , the refined art of a civil life and immortal art of public life .
Litterateurs call the stage craft of these two , drama and folk-drama .
Folk-drama are related to public life .
Many forms of these folk-dramas like Nautanki , Bhagat , Swang , Ramlila are prevalent .
The art which , for centuries , having beaten by time , is moving ahead with uninterrupted speed , which has sprung from the public and is the -LRB- own -RRB- art of the public , that art ` s usefulness , influence and importance is unequivocal .
The meaning of the word Swang is put on a disguise .
This process of putting on a disguise has always been for two things - for acting on the stage and for doing the work of a spy .
Sometimes , its third form is seen during prayers of Gods-Goddesses .
There is a tradition of performing in many forms wearing disguise on the occasion of marriage etc . too .
The folk-drama , Swang has relation to the practice of wearing disguise , used for stage performances .
The use of the word Swang was done for some or other form of acting in the sixteenth century and even before that .
Drama is a composite art in which there has been a blend of many arts , poetry , music , drawing , architecture , dance , acting , etc . .
In human efforts when beauty is mixed then art is born .
In India , the use of the word art has always been for that special skill with the help of which a man ` s esthetic bend , intelligence and rationality are communicated .
To present anything in this world which is knowable , processable and usable by human senses , in the most beautiful form , is art .
Swang is counted among various forms of folk-drama .
Folk-drama too is a composite art like literary dramas , in which , there is a blend of arts like dance , music , dialogue skills , poetry , instrumental music , acting skills .
As a genre of literature , Swang is definitely an art .
Though , there is no order and refinement like a literary drama in it , even then , it has all the ingredients of a drama .
In it , there is a delightful and emotive expression of various forms of truth .
Swang is an art which has passed this test .
As it is very close to public-life , as much clear , poignant expression of the wordly-life is possible in a Swang , that much , is not -LRB- possible -RRB- in dramas .
Art is a stream flowing parallel to life , not a stagnant flow .
Art is comparable to a beautiful garden or park in the middle of a busy industrial city , in which , a man , tired of the suffocating environment of wordly-life , gets relief for sometime .
Reaching the highest peak of emotional closeness , coming out of the narrow deep well of ego , it attains closeness to a larger grand life .
The power-importance of this folk-drama art which taking away the bodily tiredness of the day , gives new enthusiasm to life , can not be rejected .
Amusement is the foremost use of art .
This element of the use of art is the only speciality of Swang which for centuries has been giving the strength for this art to be alive and flourish .
In it ` s performance , from start to end , enough material is available for amusement .
There is no definite and fixed form of art .
Scholars have made two classes of art for the ease of learning - fine art and practical art .
The relation of Practical art is with the different materialistic necessities of our daily life .
On the other hand , the relation of fine art is with a man ` s inner consciousness and aesthetics .
Swang is a fine art , in fact Swang can be called a trifold of fine art .
There is a unique confluence of music , poetry and acting in Swang .
The sweetness of music , artistics of poetry and poignancy of acting give Swang an effective form of art which takes it to the highest degree of opera .
These Swangs not only satisfy our happiness need but also in them public welfare and worldly-welfare is inherent .
Seeing a majority of Swangs , our social consciousness is awakened and we begin thinking in the direction of making our social life better .
In this way these Swangs give us enough teaching for making an individual and making a society .
This teaching is so humorous , so innocent , musical that it does not feel to us like advice or lesson .
The teaching that Swang presents before us , it ` s basis is sometimes history , sometimes Puranas and sometimes famous events from our daily life .
` Lilochaman ` , ` Hamara Hindustan ` , ` Bharat-Chin ` , ` Subhash Bose ` , Garib Hindustan ` , etc . are some such Swangs which awaken the public in the direction of knowledge of the times .
` Puranmal ` , ` Gopichand ` , ` Chandrahas ` , ` Satyavan-Savitri ` , like Swangs present that glorious facet of the Indian tradition which is glowing with the brilliance of detachment , devotion , sacrifice , charity and relinquishment .
` Amar Singh Rathore ` , ` Yashwant Singh ` , Chatrapati Shivaji ` , Dayaram Gujjar ` , Prithviraj Chauhan ` , Kshtrani Durgawati ` , etc . are many such Swangs which even today transfuse energetic fervor in the blood of the audience .
Seeing these Swangs the mind of the audience fills with courage and heroism , their arms start throbbing .
The creators of Swangs are rural artists .
These artists did not give much attention to the rules and regulations of dramatics and neither there was much training with them .
Swang artists are engrossed in presentation of the exact situations for the fulfillment of their objective .
These talented rural dramatists should only get the foremost credit of mocking the shortcomings of the society and attracting the attention of the oppressed against powerful officers .
Today , the so called polite and cultured dramatists can not assimilate with the dusty - rustic rural life .
In this situation , they can not reach near them , can not understand their joys-sorrows and neither can they touch the hearts of this rural society which is eighty-five percent part of India .
Swang artist has been creating these Swang dramas by mixing a timely layer of imagination on very famous stories based on Ramayan , Mahabharata , Srimad Bhagvadgita , different Puranas , history and folk-lores .
His objective has only been entertainment of the public in all spheres of life and retouching his liking and for it ` s fulfillment , this folk artist has made all aspects of human life a medium of his art .
In Swangs , there is an effort to make public-life restrained and happy .
It ` s creation happens because of collective necessity and inspiration .
So these wrap in them folk-tales , folk-thoughts and democracy .
Swang exhibit the emotions and feelings of the masses , not a person .
Depiction of the social life is done in very bright colors in Swang .
Caustic sarcastic blows on disparity in current social life are filled in Swang .
There is a vivid description of partition time Hindu-Muslim sectarianism in ` Lilamochan ` .
The plots of Swangs are loose .
In the beginning , the pace of the story is relaxed but later slowly there is an increase in it ` s pace .
In Swangs , in the characters , there is local distinctiveness but along with that , probably , in them , class-wise distinctiveness and arrangement of qualities is also found .
Each character represents some special social trend .
One important speciality of Swangs is that through their filmy stage , the history of centuries of the Indian folk-life is seen peeping .
The stage of Swangs is without fanfare .
It is open on all four sides .
Is only made of planks , in which , there is no arrangement for the entry and exit of the actors and neither is there any fixed place for their sitting .
In them , there is no arrangement for the scenes and act .
All the tasks , on their own keep on going methodically .
In this form of folk-drama , there is dominance of verses .
So it is also called folk-opera .
Along with entertainment through the medium of melodious songs , their main intention is to place in heart the useful doctrines of science of morality .
Just like a Swang creator remains free from the specific rules , traditions and other conventions of dramatics , in the same way , the language of these Swangs remains free from the binding of rules and principles of grammar .
Their language is the language of the masses .
There may not be literary-value and figures of speech in them but -LRB- it -RRB- has the power to touch the minds of the people .
According to the saying ` Language is flowing water ` the language and expression of the Swangs is flowing .
Although unfamiliar with the maze of psychology , these Swang creators with the medium of known story-topics are fully capable of easily expressing the mental frame .
Public-life does not head in any fixed direction in any fixed convention-bound flow , it ` s flow is manifold and its expanse is very broad .
This multifariousness of public-life only is expressed in folk literature in it ` s countless and various forms .
Multifaceted diversity seen in public-life gets expressed in these Swangs .
If Swangs are classified based on emotions , then there can be four classes of the entire Swang literature .
Hero worship and love for eroticism are the main ingredients of public-interest of the Hindi-speaking area .
Devotion comes in the third place .
In Swangs which are written in devotion , the emotion of tranquility is dominant .
The Swangs which are written taking the Heroic emotion , in them also , among generosity , and heroism in war and heroism in Dharma , the moods of heroism in Dharma and heroism in war are expressed in more bright colors .
In heroism dominated Swangs , the description of strength and bravery is done .
The depiction of battle craziness of brave heroes is presented in a very effective manner .
Just as the Indo-China war could not disappear from the eyes of the Swang creator , in the same way Indo-Pakistan strife also could not remain untouched by his pen .
As a result , ` Pakistan ki Marammat ` and Chau ke Chuhe ` Swangs came in front of the people .
In these Swangs , where on one hand , India ` s win over Pakistan is shown , there on the other hand , the famous battle skill of all the Indian soldiers is also praised .
Not only that , but the Swang ` Pakistan ki Marammat ` sheds light on some parts of the life of Indian soldiers too .
Heroism of Dharma , generosity and benevolence all three are related to each other .
Charity and compassion both are matters of Dharma .
In Swangs ` Satyavadi Harishchandra ` , ` Moradhwaj ` , ` Narasi ka Bhaat ` , ` Vairaat Parwa ` , etc . all the three aforesaid forms of heroism can be seen .
These Swangs present the story of the personal struggle done for the protection of truth and justice .
The heroes of all the aforesaid Swangs are ideal characters and at the end of the day they have attained the their intended fruits .
The complete glaze of eroticism is seen on those Swangs which are written with famous love stories as basis .
Where as , in the standard dramas separation-aspect of eroticism is depicted in a more strong manner , there , in Swangs , the unification aspect is presented in a more effective manner .
In Swangs , where on one hand there is expression of rebellious feelings of eroticism , there on the other hand , in devotion related Swangs , emotion of tranquility is dominantly seen .
In tranquility dominated Swangs , along with devotion and detachment , many noble human-values are expressed .
In the Swang ` Moradhwaj ` when king Moradhwaj gives permission to two hermits -LRB- Shri Krishna and Arjun -RRB- to make his only son Dheerdhwaj the meal of their tiger , then believing that Dheerdhwaj is half part of the queen too , he goes to take permission of the queen .
` Satyavadi Harishchandra ` , Satyavaan-Savitri ` , etc . are examples of the emotion of tranquility .
The eyes of a Swang creator move in all four directions .
Their vision is piercing and grasp deep .
This is the reason that , any such event that he thinks is useful for public entertainment and public collection , -LRB- he -RRB- picks and writes a Swang on it .
A Swang writer gets the plot of his Swang from many sources .
So Swangs can also be classified on the basis of the sources of the plot .
There are three sources of the plot of Swangs - Puranas , history and society .
The creation of the palace of folk-literature has been on the solid foundation of Dharma .
Dharma is the strength and support of popular literature .
Formation of popular literature has been by the inspiration of Dharma .
Dharma has done the job of a background in the formation of this literature .
The intention of creation of puranic Swangs was propagation of scriptural teachings .
The intentions of these Swangs were to arouse scriptural spirit among people , not just entertaining .
In these the element of preaching was important .
These Swangs present the sublime aspect of Indian culture .
Swang writers have chosen only those stories from the Puranas which are useful for the people and by the means of which an ideal life can be instilled in the public .
Many Swangs are also love sagas .
The love of Nala-Damayanti and Usha-Anirudha is worldly love .
They can not be enshrined parallel to ideal love , higher than the plane of worldly love , of Satyavan-Savitri .
In the story Satyavan-Savitri there is some different ethereal element more than an ideal worldly husband-wife love in front of which the indestructible power of Dharmaraj also fails .
If at all the Swangs based on the worldly love story of Nal-Damayanti and Usha-Anirudha were considered Puranic Swangs , it was only because their stories were prevalent from the Puranic times .
The other reason also is that although the hero-heroin of these stories were human , the direction of the story was done mainly by unearthly divine characters .
In Puranic and religious stories of Swang , an element of supernaturanlism is included .
In the struggle between the godly and demonic powers , the victory of the gods side is inevitable .
As a result , after victory of truth and defeat of the powers obstructing the ideal , elevation of the ideal is the final outcome of these Swangs .
Even though the momentary success of the wrong side is seen here , but the matchless honor of ultimate victory is gotten only by the righteous side .
The number of historical Swangs is not more in Swang literature .
The historical knowledge of a Swang writer is so less and his education so limited that he does not get into the maze of historical facts .
Actually this thing is out of his capability .
He has not studied history enough .
He has chosen only hear-say historical events for his Swangs .
There are also some stories whom he has deliberately related to some royal family .
Probably it is his belief that stories related to kings have more effect on the public .
This is the reason why baring some social plots , heroes of most Swangs are related to royal families in some or the other form , ` Shahi Lakadhara ` , ` Chabili Bhatiyari ` , ` Saranade ` , ` Rama Nandamohana Devi ` , etc . are such Swangs .
There may or may not be any connection of these Swangs to royal families , but a Swang writer has definitely related them to royal families .
The real or fictional existence of states and royal families in Indian Swangs , shows the feudalistic mindset of the people .
The basic mindset of Indian people is feudalistic .
The famous progressive leader Dhirendra Majumdar has written that the mindset of our country is feudalistic , aspirations collective and sustenance is socialistic .
In these Swangs , along with history , from the point of view of geographical and economic study too there is enough material filled up .
There is description of various places in these Swangs .
Description of many famous things of many places is present which sheds light on the economic geography .
These Swangs are full of mythical examples like vessels of gold , jewellery , combs and washing feet with milk .
Just like Puranic Swangs , social Swangs have also been written in large numbers .
Some stories of these social Swangs are common on which all Swang writers have written Swangs .
Because of its fame , those who have not written , they play the Swang written by somebody else .
The reason is only this , these stories have become so famous that just by hearing their name , the mind of the spectator starts gushing since he is completely well-versed with the said story .
So he does no find it difficult to understand the plot of the Swang .
Some foreign stories have also been presented in the form of Swangs .
Apart from this , some stories have bore the fruit of the Swang writers imagination because they are totally new .
The number of Swangs based on common stories is maximum .
Although the number of Swangs based on original stories is probably not very less from the number of Swangs based on common stories , even then , these Swang writers do less imagination of original stories .
Their imagination prowess is not so rich that they can create some new plot .
But that does not conclude that there is dearth of originality in Indian Swangs .
According to us , Swangs coming under this category are most important .
Truthfully speaking , in these Swangs , public psyche is getting reflected .
As truthful , candid and unadulterated expression of public-life is seen in these Swangs , is -LRB- seen -RRB- less in other Swangs .
These rural Swang writers have always been on the forefront of mocking the wrongdoings of the society and raising voice against powerful , tyrant officers and raising the voice of the oppressed .
They are the poets of this land , this village .
There are so many such Swangs which along with entertainment , also sprinkle driblets of knowledge and education simultaneously .
In this category , we have mostly social Swangs through which the sentimental community is appeased and also enlightened .
These Swangs are the ideal of ` Kantaasammit ` advice or synergic practice of the beneficial-pleasurable .
For preaching and entertainment there is no need of separate efforts .
Both these goals are achieved together .
That Swang is a form of drama , is well known .
Not only that , but folk-drama is the origin of literary dramas , some scholars are even of the opinion - Swang drama holds a special place in the set style of folk-drama .
In Hindi literature there will be hardly any reference of a drama older than Swang .
Swang is an ancient drama , so there can be discussion on Swang in the light of many conventions used in scientific dramas .
The purpose of the verse of benediction and invocation of the deities is remembering God and the essence of praying to God for the uninterrupted completion of the orchestration .
In Swangs , this verse of benediction of the scientific dramas , is seen preserved in some changed form .
In this verse of benediction of the Swangs , there is a discussion of mostly two things .
Swang writers firstly pay respects to their desired -LRB- deity -RRB- .
This respect is mostly in the form of couplet .
After praising the desired -LRB- deity -RRB- he remembers his teacher .
A swang writer has belief in teacher ` s blessing so much that before presenting any of his creation he considers it mandatory to discuss about the teacher .
The language of this verse of benediction is different from the language of the rest of the Swang .
In this , there is more vernacular-ism and at some places Sanskrit is also included .
Not just that , some Swang writers do not even make use of Hindi in the verse of benediction .
For that , they bring to use Sanskrit psalm verses .
According to Sanskrit Natya Shastra , in a drama , after the verse of benediction , the act named Rangadwar is concluded .
In rangdwar there is indication of the beginning of the drama .
The narrator , pays respect to the flag of Indra by reading a verse .
Then dances for pleasing Parvati and ghosts .
After this , narrator , jester and the servants of the narrator speak among themselves .
Through this conversation the audience is given an idea of the plot .
This act is also called Sthapana in Sanskrit natya shastra .
This prologue is done by the Sthapak .
The work of the sthapaka is to introduce the plot of the drama or the main characters of the drama for the socials .
This ` Rangadwar ` and ` Sthapaka ` are also present in swangs .
The announcement that the swang has begun is given by beating the kettledrum .
All the characters of swang sometimes personally one by one and together show dance .
We can call this dance an alternative to the dance done for pleasing Parvati and ghosts in the rangadwar .
After that the hero of the swang -LRB- who is also the compere -RRB- comes , gives an introduction of himself and his teacher .
Appeals to the public to remain quiet during the exhibition and the acting .
After that he presents the beginning part of the story of the swang .
In this way we see that ` Rangadwar ` is also present in a swang , it is another thing that , the scientific form of the ` rangadwar ` is not found in swang which is discussed in the natya shastra .
From the point of view of natya shastra , the plots whose dramatization is not desired on stage are notified by the arthopakshepaka .
There has been some discussion in swang on this arthopakshepaka element of natya shastra .
Probably all scholars say that there are no arthopakshepakas in swang .
If seen minutely , then it can be easily known that the vaartaa element in swang is the arthopakshepaka of the sanskrit dramas .
The place of this vaartaa is important in swang .
Its job is to give pace to the plot .
In reality , things that can not be enacted on the stage , their description is possible only through the medium of this vaartaa .
This vaartaa is in prose and poetry both .
In this way , we see that all those traditions of a drama which are said to be mandatory in a drama , are definitely present in the folk-drama swang in some or the other form .
While literary dramas entertain the sophisticated and cultured citizens , swangs -LRB- entertain -RRB- the huge simple populace living in the beautiful lap of nature away from artificiality .
The story of swang is loose and flexible .
While presenting only the swang performers do their presentations by decreasing-increasing their acts as needed .
Sometimes , due to time constraints , removing some acts , he makes does with vaartaa in their place .
It is right that a swang performer is totally free to twist the plot etc . but even then , he does let the soul of the story die .
A drama has acts division , in swang there is no such thing .
In place of scenes and acts , it has the elements of dramatization , complete in its own way , like the leela dramas .
Where absence of songs and dances is seen in modern dramas , there the strength of swangs lies in songs and dance only .
The acting in dramas is more vyaya sadhya as compared to swangs .
While writing the drama , the writer of a drama gives stage instructions about acting at various places as needed .
A swang writer does not give these stage instructions .
The one and only reason for this is that the writer and director of a drama are different people .
Thus through these stage instructions the director gets full support in drama-acting .
On the other hand , the writer and director of swang is mostly only one person .
Apart from stage decoration , between swang and literary drama there is a difference in terms of language too .
In literary drama , pure and literary form of language only is adopted .
Not only that , there , importance is given to character based language too .
But in swang all the characters mostly use the same language and that is the language of the masses .
Summing up , although swang has many virtues of a literary drama , still there is some difference between the two .
If one is a decorated garden in some palace , the other is a cluster of trees grown in a deserted forest .
Swang and a movie are both stage performances .
Both have relation to the public-life .
It can not be said today that cinema is only limited to the city ` s certain group of people .
Movie is a photograph exhibited on a white sheet .
Exactly opposite to this , we don ` t see photos , but live people in costumes on the stage of a swang .
One more difference between swang and cinema is that in a swang there is no photo .
Statues in flesh and blood express their feelings in a natural simple way .
They do not sweeten your tooth by just reminding jaggery .
These are actual mounds of jaggery .
Cinema is clearly an artistic representation of scientific inventions .
On the other hand , there is no relationship seen between swang and science .
There is complete absence of the framework of scene enactment adopted in cinema , in swang .
In terms of acting , cinema is better than swang .
Since in swang the female parts are played by males only , so in them , there is no softness , subtlety and smoothnes in acting like in cinema .
But that never implies that the acting side of swang is ineffective .
The door of swang is open for all .
In cinema we spend money for entry and then watch the movie .
If someone wants entertainment and has no money with him , then he can not even enter in the big cinema hall .
In swang whatever the spectator gives is in the form of donation which he gives it only after measuring the art and limits of entertainment .
Cinema is played in a closed hall but swang under the open sky .
All the spectators watching the swang , whether they are invited or uninvited , all are same .
It is proved by this that in its present form , cinema is a capitalist system , while as swang is socialist where neither finance is a constraint nor the distinction of caste .
Mostly there are two parts of songs and scenes seen in a movie - one light popular -LRB- light -RRB- and other classical -LRB- classic -RRB- .
But in swang there is only folk popular form of songs and dance .
In swang , baring some parts of vaartaa , the whole pace of the plot is dependent on tunes .
But in cinema only on certain occasions , songs are presented for elucidating the heartfelt feelings of the hero-heroine or creating the atmosphere .
These days some swang writers have started creating their tunes based on the film tunes too and in this way cine-music is influencing folk-music .
Pictures of cinema are still photographs and pictures of swang are live , articulating and moving .
That is why the mark of the swang is deep , influence strong and impact rooted .
A film actor himself becomes a part of a machine of the work of film-making and slowly looses the inner happiness of acting skill .
But a swang performer gets the appreciation and applause of the public sitting in thousands of numbers .
He enchants the audience by his acting-skill and sweet voice and the audience too immerses in that emotion .
In cinema , producer , director , writer , actor , singer and musician , etc . are all different people , but a swang performer himself is a multi-talented person .
Thus , if , with the help of many scientific inventions , cinema is a modern form of refined dais , then swang also is not only a strong part of tradition of folk-drama but also a highest form of drama .
Folk-drama has come in front of people in many of it ` s forms .
It ` s different forms are used in different regions .
Almost all scholarly writers do not present any difference between swang and nautanki .
No basis for presenting the difference is seen .
But , the biggest difficulty that comes in accepting swang and nautanki as only one form of drama is that why then was the word nautanki used for that genre when the word swang is already the ?
Probably , nautanki is a much later concept and it was propagated for the entertainment of fashionable people for enacting the romance-related stories .
It is clear from the statement of Dr . Shyam Parmar that use of nautanki has been for enacting romance related stories .
` Nautanki ` was a beautiful heroine of Punjab .
The swang written on her life story became so successful that later any swang written in the same manner came to be called nautanki and this story reached the near by districts .
From the viewpoint of principles even though they are one , today , from the viewpoint of acting definitely difference has developed between them .
The stage of a swang is in the center of the special venue and the audience sits on all four sides of it but the stage of nautanki is on one side and the audience sits on its three sides .
Although kettle-drum is the instrument of both the folk-dramas , even then in swang it hasn ` t attained that position as that in nautanki .
In nautanki as soon as the kettle-drum is beaten , the audience comes running from far away .
A nautanki can not be even imagined without a kettle-drum .
In comparison to swang , nautanki has become some what refined and polished .
There , clothes keep changing as per characters and situations .
This is seen very rarely in swang .
At times , if there is a reason for changing clothes , then the concerned actor either changes clothes sitting on the stage itself or down near the stage only .
But in nautankis , a separate place is made for changing clothes or guise .
Not only that , in swang , one woman plays the role of a girl at one moment , of a queen the second moment and of a mother-in-law the third moment .
In swang , male characters are there to play the role of women characters but in nautanki the female roles are done by females only .
The language of swang is almost same in all stories but the language of a nautanki keeps changing according to the story .
For example , if the story of the nautanki is based on some Mughal king , then Urdu is used more in it ` s language and if the story is based on some Hindu king or family then plenty of Hindi language words will be found in it .
In nautanki , scenes of wars etc . are shown in explicit form with swords and shield etc . but in swangs such scenes are said in vaartaa etc . -LRB- in indicative form -RRB- .
` Bhagat ` as is clear from it ` s name , that is a devotion dominated performance .
From the medieval times , the stage of bhagat has been very famous .
According to ` Aine Akbari ` , ` bhagat ` is a music similar to kirtan , but in it , a normal swang is presented by wearing different types of costumes .
From medieval times till today , the stage of bhagat has been going on live and active , has been entertaining the minds of people in some or the other form .
These days , Mathura , Vrindavan and Agra are the strongholds of this stage .
Today the main difference between bhagat and swang is that bhagat are performed by unprofessional traditional theaters for entertainment or in the form of competition with other theaters .
For these performances the organizers spend thousands of rupees themselves or by collection .
Swang performances are done on a professional basis .
To assemble in some theater of bhagat too , the assembler first has to accept the studentship of the master and tying the turban to the master , has to distribute sweets to all other people .
There is no such traditional practice in the swang troupes .
The tradition of reward is there in swang too but here the reward is probably one rupee or two rupees , not more than this .
In bhagat , the members of the theater themselves also give rewards to the artists but in swang there is no such practice .
In bhagat , in the beginning , there is a tradition of keeping a flame and thaapaa of the Goddess and praying the Goddess .
In bhagat , in the beginning Ganesh dances and the master of the theater does it ` s worship on the stage .
There is no such tradition in swang .
There , neither a lamp of ghee , etc . is burned nor there is any special arrangement made on completion .
In bhagat , the person who writes the bhagat for the theater is called a Guru .
Where the writer of bhagat works with the feeling of tendency towards righteousness and staying away from the indecency of romance , there the writer of swang does not especially care about this .
In swangs , apropos many a times romance becomes more too .
This difference is not only clearly seen in the written form of these two but also in their presentation .
Ram-Leela is the epitome of the righteous mindset of the Indians .
It has been helpful in establishing unity of Indian culture in the whole country .
In the bhakti period its propagation was at its peak .
Ram - Leela was specially promoted in Awadh , Mithila and Kashi .
In modern times , even today , its promotion has been big in the aforesaid places , specially it has been fostering the dramatic bent of the rural population .
Along with propagating-spreading the feelings of religious awakening and unity , there has been special contribution of these leelas in public entertainment .
This is the reason that through the medium of stage , Ram-Leela and swang have been entertaining the people for centuries .
Both Ram-Leela and swang are folk-drama and the own treasure of the people .
Public language is only their medium of expression , public entertainment and public safety is only the goal of both of them , in both , male actors only play the role of female characters .
In the spheres of both of them , there is no dearth of talented artists working on the stage .
In Ram-Leela , events related to Ram ` s life get a place .
But the scope of swang is so broad that , in it , other than this , many events , subjects and characters are also chosen from the viewpoint of the storyline .
In Ram-Leela , the characters are made to enter by the compere .
In the beginning only , after praising ShriRama , he tells in brief about the the leela that is to be played on that day .
He probably is present on the stage , keeps monitoring of the dialogues and keeps reading the related points from the Ramcharitmanas .
Just like in leela , the director from the behind the curtain keeps helping the leela performers on forgetting the dialogues etc. , that tradition is not seen in swang .
In Ram-Leela , the costume of its characters is compatible to them .
Not only that , but characters playing the roles like Hanuman etc . also make use of different-different types of masks .
Raas-Leela is an important part of folk-drama .
It has got a lot of popularity in Mathura , Vrindavan and adjoining places and even today , in these areas , there is a lot of importance of these .
Everyday , in Mathura or Vrindavan it ` s presentation can be seen in some temple or other , or garden or some high-raised platform .
In raas-leela , ShriKrishna ` s life scenes , especially the love scenes of Radha-Krishna are performed .
Raas-leela and swang , these two folk-dramas are famous in their own areas .
Both are the dramas of the common people , probably different from the so called taste of the civil people .
In both , a touch of humor is also given intermittently .
In raas , ` Mansukha ` is there in the form of a jester , who talking lovingly and jokingly with different gopis , expresses their love towards Krishna and also entertains the audience .
In swang , a ` mimic ` or ` joker ` is there for this work who entertains the people in many ways .
In the language of both the dramas , there is probably a complete absence of loan words and abundance of vernacular words .
The scope of the subject-plot of raas is limited and of swang broad .
Similar to the finiteness of the subject of raas , the scope of presentation of raas is also limited .
The areas of Braj and Mathura have only been the areas of raas .
On the other hand , swang is one favorite folk-drama which probably has been spread over entire northern India .
In raas , the musicians sit on the front portion of the stage or one corner of the front portion .
Near about is the arrangement for the gopis to sit .
But in swang the musicians are in the middle of the stage and other artists too come and sit near them .
Among musical instruments too where the kettle-drum is popular in swang there the main instrument of raas is mridanga .
The story of swang gets over in only one day .
But the the story of raas , especially which is written considering the entire life of Krishna as the basis , probably like Ram-Leela , goes on for many days .
In any country ` s folk-literature , the thoughtfulness in which the folk-dramas having treasured , safeguarded the country ` s civility and culture , that much has not been in any other mode .
There are also different forms of folk-dramas - raas-leela , ram-leela , movie , nautanki , swang .
The search for newer dimensions for the expression of feelings , forces newer mediums of literature to take birth .
First one medium fights to take its form and later its fight becomes blended with evolution .
Folk-dramas can also be paced keeping them on this land of evolution .
For the civil society , along with plays , on a parallel level , the folk-dramas made for the people , by the people have also been moving .
The language of the dramas that were written in Sanskrit literature was very different from the language of the people .
It was difficult for the common people to understand that language .
Literary dramas were written for the elite class who could write , read and understand Sanskrit language .
Therefore , dramas of Sanskrit remained the artistic taste and means of entertainment of a special class .
They had no relation with the common people .
Man , from ancient times , has come up with some or the other means of his fun and entertainment .
Because of the written form of civil dramas , they are available today .
By this only their historical links can be treasured , its earlier form too has been almost made stable .
But this could not happen in the case of drama literature of the common people .
The reason for this is non-availability of their written form .
Even then , since human nature is same , there arises no question of doubt in the state of this form of drama of the common people .
In the case of the existence of both the dramas , folk-dramas have been influenced by standard dramas and standard dramas by folk-dramas .
In the beginning these dramas were written from the point of view of literature and not enacting .
But with changing times , due to the impact of folk-drama , they were written from the view point of acting and acting was their medium too .
From these things it is clear that , whatever might have been it ` s earlier form , the tradition of folk-drama existed for the entertainment of the masses much before the drama-literature written in regional languages .
Many scholars believe that in reality its earlier form has been dance .
Not only India , but in many places of the world , folk-drama has been believed to be based on dance .
Once expressing his views on the origin on dramas , Bernard Shaw had said that drama originated from the combination of two of our childlike habits - the habit of seeing dance and the habit of listening to stories .
If we see keeping that statement in our country ` s context , then an important place will have to be given to music along with dance and story .
The reason for this is that our public taste gives place to story only after dance and music .
This is the reason why in ancient India , the folk-dramatists made dance and music an important means for making the puranic , religious and social stories heartfelt in an entertaining way for the people .
From this inference can be made that dance and music which are a mandatory element of drama , developed together in their earlier stages .
In ancient India , drama , dance and music did not develop independently like today .
The organization of these initial dance-dramas was basically considered two-fold .
Firstly that ancient human took the help of these dance-dramas to pray to his Goddesses-Gods , to please them and to get safety from natural disasters .
We can see the other form of these dramas at the time when the common man expresses his happiness on holy periods , beautiful seasons , good crop or other happy occasions .
In this way , after accepting these initial dance-dramas as the birth-givers of dramas , one question arises .
And that is , who has been most ancient between folk-dances and folk-dram ?
According to Dr . Somnath Gupta , among these entertainers having relation to Hindi , probably raas-leela is most ancient .
There is praising of Mahaprabhu Vallabhacharya at the beginning of raas-leela .
So only , the start of raas-leela should be after the time -LRB- 1497-1531 A. D -RRB- of the Maharabhu .
During the time Kabir , there was prevalence of one very effective means of entertainment in the form of swang .
After getting tested on the acid test of time only any medium can get such an important and influential place in the society .
It is proved by this that if swang drama had achieved such a high position during the time of Kabir then its tradition must have older than it .
From these facts based on the dohas of Kabir it is undoubtedly proved that swang drama tradition has been definitely older than raas-leela .
The time of Kabir is definitely before Mahaprabhu Vallabhacharya .
Some scholars believe the origin of dramas to be the acting of puppets .
But this can not be assumed because in the dance of puppets too there has been attribution of human feelings .
This can be accepted that after himself becoming the hero of drama , man wished to show his art through the medium of puppets but it does not seem proper that presenting them in the form of puppets even before knowing and recognizing these dramatic mediums and acting by own self .
The reference of the folk-drama ` swang ` is found before first centuary in Kalidas ` s drama Malavikagnimitra .
The meaning of this is that even at the time of Poet Kalidas , there was prevalence of swang folk-drama .
The place of siddha is even before Kabir in the time ordering .
Even Kalidas himself was present long before siddha .
Swang in the form of folk-drama has been an old instrument of revelry .
Its reference is found even in the times of Aurangzeb .
It ` s reference is found in a masanvi of Maulana ` Ganimat ` , ` Naurange Ishq ` .
The creation of this masanvi was done in 1685 A.D .
It is clear from this description that at the time of Aurangzeb the popular tradition of mimicry and swang was present and this art had also done lot of development .
These artists performing swang wander from one place to another .
Imitating Kashmiris and the English proves that their reach was upto far countries and people of every strata of the society .
They were well conversant with their lifestyle , clothing , nature etc . .
From one reference of famous poet of Hindi Sabal Singh Chauhan , a contemporary of Maulana Ganimat also , it is confirmed that in those days there was a lot of popularity of swangs .
The creators of folk-dramas and literary dramas have their own work zones .
Both do efforts to broaden the effect of their talent in their own fields .
One does not enter the territory of the other .
The territory of the creator of folk-drama is the masses while as the territory of literary drama is the elite class .
Being in the form of written literature , the history of literary dramas can be easily be readied .
The situation of folk-drama is different from this .
Maximum information is gotten from individual interview of famous living swang performers .
Swami Shankardas is an epoch maker in the development of swang art .
The entire history of swang can be divided in to before Shankar era , Shankar era and after Shankar era .
In before Shankar era the first and foremost name is Lakshman Gir .
The main topics of his creations were related to religious life .
His special programs used to be organized in the Ganga Fair .
After Lakshman Gir the notable name is of Sedhu Singh .
From the creations of his disciple Phool Singh , it is understood that Sedhu Singh was a resident of Hapur .
Sedhu Singh was a disciple of Lakshman Gir .
This also is confirmed from the last lines of another swang of Phool Singh ` Ram Banvas `` only .
Chaudahry Phool Singh was a person of religious inclination .
The musical beauty of his poetry was worth watching .
The names of two disciples of Chaudhary Phool Singh are famous - Bakhshi Ram and Bhagirath .
One disciple of Vishnudas fakir was Gangadas .
One very important fact about Gangadas is that he had kept one lady for the role of female character in his troupe .
That lady only played the role of female characters .
The resident of Mau , Lakshman Singh only gets the credit of this thing that his disciple following has been continuing in properly .
Before Swami Shankardas there have been other famous swang performers different from his own tradition .
In them the name of Behu Singh is very important .
The swang writing style of Behu Singh was very different .
When a wave would pass his mind he would sit on a mat .
Would take off the straws of the mat .
Used to make a chaubola stanza and used to break and keep one straw separately .
In this way for every chaubola stanza would break and keep one straw .
In the evening when his son Umrao Singh would come home , he would pick each straw and make him write the chaubola stanza made by him .
His swangs are written in Farsi script only .
There has been performance of all swangs of Behu Singh but the notable thing is that he himself would not act in the swang .
Ustad Moolraj was one swang writer contemporary of Behu Singh .
Moolraj was a scholar of Arabic and Farsi and so the language of his swangs is Urdu dominated Hindi .
But like Behu Singh only , he only wrote swangs , not enact .
Shankar Yug - Swami Shankardas was one devout soul .
The place that Goswami Tulsidas has got in the Bakti period of Hindi literature , that place can be given to Swami Shankardas in the medieval period of folk-literature of Haryana .
Post Shankar period - Although Swami Shankardas was a singer of bhajan and holi but barring two of his disciples all disciples were swang writers .
Two disciples of Chandralal have treasured their own different theaters .
Their names are Natthu and Bhullan .
Other than small musicals and bhajans none of them write a full swang now .
Both perform the swangs written by their own teacher or other swang writers .
Nathulal ` s another disciple is Pandit Balwant Singh alias Bulli .
The name of Bulli is a challenge for people who accuse swang of being romantic and vulgur .
The notable thing regarding the language of the swangs of Bulli is that he has phenomenal command over language .
Nathulal ` s disciple Mansingh got a lot of success but he did not become as popular as Bulli .
The name of Mansingh ` s disciple Pandit Raghunath Sharma is foremost among folk-poets related to social feelings .
Raghunath ji has written independent musicals also .
Capability of description depiction is good in him .
He has raised social questions in his creations .
In the end of Roopwati Choodavat ` Raghunath ji has appealed to the women of India to adopt courageous feelings .
He has faith in Hindu lifestyle .
Social inequality and corruption are unbearable for him .
Another important disciple of Swami Shankardas was Pandit Netaramji .
Pandit Netaram was first a story reader but later got inspired towards the work of writing swang .
In the disciple tradition of Muavi , the name of his disciple Mansingh comes first .
There were two disciples of Mansingh , Dulichand and Lakhmichand .
Pandit Mangeram was among the main disciples of Swami Shankar Das .
Wherever his swang was performed , there , public used to come running listening to his name .
He was considered as the all-knower of science of verses and a great Pandit of Sanskrit .
This is the reason that in his swang the Sanskrit words which have been used , they have come in their original form only .
Jamu Aamir was the resident of his teacher ` s village Sunariya only .
But his area was not limited to Rohtak or Haryana region only .
As much fame and sway of his was in Haryana and the areas adjoining Delhi , that much was in Kuru region also .
Urdu words are also in use in his swangs along with Sanskrit and they too have come in their pure form .
Such examples of Veda Shastra have come in his swangs by which easily an inference can be made that his knowledge and study was vast .
The famous disciple of Ramlal , Bundumir is a popular artist of the people .
Along with choosing stories from history and Puranas , he has also written swangs based on some imaginary stories .
In his swangs , as compared to other swang writers prose has been given more space .
He was a person of religious thoughts .
The stamp of his thoughts can be seen clearly in his creations .
Every flower in a garden is not a flower of rose .
Many types of big-small , colorful flowers are in it which according to their ability and power spread fragrance in their vicinity .
Apart from some main big swang writers there are many other small-big such swang writers who are entertaining the people in their own areas .
Along with them , there are many such people also who write swangs but do not present them .
Swang has sustained manifold layers of changes in it ` s form-structure , in its color-shape from it ` s initial days until now .
When we put a glance on swang from the angle of development of style and art then a big difference is seen in the initial form and today ` s form of swang .
This art has developed passing through the changing contexts of time and affected by the public taste and affecting the public taste .
The ability of swang writers and demand of time have widened the path of development of swang art .
In the pre Shankar era , there were some form related own original characteristics of swang .
From the point of view of metre constrcution the famous metre of this era was chaubola .
Other chaubola the other important metres used in this era were - daud , khyaal , lavani , jhulana , kada and barahamasa .
Ragini and chaupai metre is also seen here and there .
May be some special or uncommon talent is not expected for writing these metres , but the singing of these metres must be definitely done by uncommon singers .
The most important point in that era was related to the shape of the swang .
In that period swangs were so long that 3-4 nights were needed for their performance .
Starting at ten o clock in the night , they used to go on till morning four o clock and one swang could be finished in 3-4 nights only .
In the manuscript of one swang there could be upto 100 pages .
In those days , the topics of the story used be historical and mythological only .
The dhar . and love for the past was only the reason for this .
In the swangs of that period the use of prose is not found .
The colors of regionality and locality have not faded in the language of the swangs .
The phrases and word usage have been used with their full regionality .
The trend of the language of swangs today is more towards Hindi .
Before Shankar era , Devband was the chief center of swang art .
Every year on the occasion of holi , there was a tradition of playing swang in Devband .
Shankar era - In most swangs of Meerut area abundance of ragini , bhajan and doha is seen .
In the swangs of Shankardas himself there is so much abundance of dohas that before every metre , some where one or somewhere two dohas are given .
In this era too prose was not given a place of any sorts .
As far as the question of topics is concerned , they walked on the tracks of their previous folk-drama writers only .
Post Shankar era - Chaubola which was a special metre in the pre shankar era and on which the entire swang used to be based , became close to extinct in this era .
In this era only Pandit Balwant Singh alias Bulli gave a new direction to swangs .
Even today folk-drama writers are insistent about variety of metres .
Even today two types of swang writers are seen .
In one type of swangs this variety of metres is seen and in second type of swangs only doha , kafiya and ragini can be heard .
Immediately after the Shankar era people started the use of prose in the form of vaarta in swangs .
That time the vaartas used to be very small but now both it ` s forms are seen .
Along with these vaartas , ` drama-vaarta ` has also been included in today ` s swangs .
The speciality of these drama vaartas is that the prose used in these seem like poetry because they are mostly rhyming .
At some places this drama vaarta has started taking the place of colloquy .
When the situation changed , then slowly these storylines started adopting new references of the social environment .
The speciality of the language of today ` s swangs is that it has become a mixture of Kauravi and Haryanvi .
The tradition of long or swangs running for 3-4 nights has completely stopped now .
The remarkable thing is that in spite of this shortening the soul of the story is not harmed .
The body of a human is a proportional combination of five elements .
In the same way it ` s story also is a artful combination of some fixed elements .
Whether literary drama or folk-drama , these elements are present in less or more proportions in all .
These elements are - plot , characters and characterization , place time and situation , dialogues , language style , intent and message and poetic-trust .
The plot of every swang is based on some or other event .
The form of this event is uncommon .
From the view of science , based on the chronicles three forms of story are described - famous , imaginative and mixed .
The plots of swangs are either taken from the Puranas or other religious texts or from history or from those famous folk-tales which have become an inseparable part of people ` s life in this area .
The story of ` Mordhwaj ` , ` Amar Singh Rathore ` , ` Satyavan Savitri ` , ` Raja Harishchadra ` , ` Nala-Damayanti ` , etc . is famous .
Among these some famous plots are science approved , some history approved .
` Ban Devi ` , ` Ramanand-Mohana Devi ` , ` Seth Tarachand ` , etc . are public approved plots .
These plots have become assimilated with the public-life .
The swangs written taking some film story will also come in the famous category of story .
Only those stories will come in the imaginative category of stories which are totally original .
These stories are mostly based on some social issues .
Mixed plots similar to literary dramas are found very less in these swangs .
` Heer-Ranjha ` , ` Lilo Chaman ` , etc are some such swangs whose story even though is famous but in which the swang writers change the characters , place of event , cause effect , etc . .
One literary fact of process of changing the story is that from the view point of the story each genre of literature has it ` s own limitation .
It is not necessary that , the storyline which is necessary for a folk-tale , the necessity of the same story line is also experienced in folk-drama .
So , when a swang writer chooses a folk-tale in the form of his story then keeping in view his and the needs of the stage , -LRB- he -RRB- researches , does change .
At the time changing the story the swang writer excludes the difficult and most unconvincing scenes of the story .
He wishes to choose only one simple story-path for himself and his audience .
He himself does not get entangled in a baseless maze and nor does he wish to entangle his audience .
In this process of changing the storyline , he may do any research or change from his side , no impact of this process falls on the main sentiment of the story , it stays as it is .
In this process of research and change , the folk-dramatist as far as possible makes effort that the storyline of his swang be happy ending .
The beginning of the story of swang is different from literary dramas .
The beginning of a literary dramas happens by the mutual conversation of two or more than two characters .
From their mutual conversation only the events happened prior to the story get disclosed .
The situation of swang is different from this .
Before the two characters of swang start their acting or their raginis , the compere discloses the previous part of the story himself in the form of a vaartaa .
The beginning of a swang sometimes is prosaic or sometimes poetical and sometimes in half prosaic and sometimes in half poetical .
In the beginning of the story of a swang , one thing is also mentionable that the start of these stories happens only in the doha metre .
Clash - The state in the drama in which opposite forces clash with each other for the last time and which give the conclusive moment are called clash .
From this moment only one opposing force strengthens and other starts to weaken .
Like literary dramas only , in folk dramas also the importance of clash is unambiguous .
In folk drama , this clash not being an effect of any previous scheme happens suddenly .
Abruptly some event happens and the clash beings and again abruptly some other event happens as a result of which the clash ends .
One event happens and the clouds gather and other event happens and the clouds drift away .
Clash is related to the union element because of which the hero of the folk-drama is never detached from this clash .
None of the hero or the heroine on swangs has ever committed suicide .
The hero of the swang does not consider any calamity to be a result of any of his moral shortcomings .
He connects his calamity with the ordinations of his previous birth .
In such situation he believes that where the onset of clash was just a necessary occurrence , in the same way when time comes the end of clash will be achieved by a necessary occurrence .
The union element has prominence in the plot of a swang .
This union element always gives motion to the story .
The life of the hero is going at a steady pace .
But suddenly coincidentally some such event happens in his life that some forces stand in opposition to him .
On the on set of these opposing forces fluctuation comes in the pace of the hero .
Suddenly again some occurrence happens by which the opposite side becomes more fierce .
At that time again some such occurrence happens which again changes the situation of the hero .
When this clash reaches its peak then again suddenly some such occurrence happens by which the clash ends and as a result the hero gets the fruits .
One incident comes and the clash of the story reaches a hot desert and one incident comes that it comes and sits on crop laden and yellow covered land .
Conspiracy means that ploy in which a plan is made to hurt some character by deceiving .
This ploy is organized by the villains against the hero-heroine .
In the minds of an emotional the feeling of rage and disgust towards these conspirators and the feeling of sympathy and kindness towards the characters affected by these conspiracies is formed .
The conspiracy may be successful or unsuccessful but in the end the conspiracy has be unmasked .
Arastu has called this unmasking of conspiracy as discovery .
Dr. Nagendra has done Hindi translation of discovery as abhigyaan .
From the word abhigyaan only it is clear that there is a sense of culmination of ignorance to knowledge in it .
The power of conspiracy is seen here and there in swangs .
Mainly in swangs conspiracy is related to killing .
Mostly these conspiracies are the products of frustrated , discontented and unsatisfied people .
In swangs many forms of conspiracies give the story of the swang a unique appeal .
These conspiracies become the reason for curiosity and when the person entangled in the complexity of these conspiracies suddenly becomes free from the binds of the conspiracy , then the feeling of wonderment is created in the mind of an emotional .
For a folk drama there is no difference between worldly and ethereal .
Where a swang writer includes worldly and human incidents in his swang there even supernatural events come in his story easily .
The events which can be called impossible on an intellectual level those events become possible in swang .
This supernatural element is found only in the actions done by the characters endowed with supernatural powers .
This supernatural element is in the activity done by characters like ghost-corpse , devil , Goddess-God , etc . .
Actually this supernatural element resides in entire folk-literature in some or the other form , not just in swangs .
The people here believe in the different forms of Goddess-Gods .
Accepts their supremacy over man , the entering of this belief of theirs in the folk-dramas is very natural .
The compassionate God himself walks and reaches here , Lord Krishna tests his follower and on passing it He manifests His original form in front of him .
The wonder element created in a poetry by the astonishing emotion .
Examples of such astonishing elements are found in swangs everywhere .
In the swang Usha Anirudha , one friend of Usha , Chitrarekha is such who makes the portrait of all without even seeing .
The Indian mind set is of such manner-morality that a person engulfed in a clash believes in the grace of the Lord .
One or the other day truth will be victorious and the tormentor will be destroyed .
This culture is the foundation of the Indian way of life .
This is the reason why we get more happy-ending stories in Indian swangs .
There are some stories also in swangs whose end is sad and full of pathos .
In such stories this color of compassion is very deep and touching .
Seeing it , tears get welled up in the eyes of the most hard hearted audience also .
It is not easy to get an idea of the speed of the story of a swang .
The stories in which the romance element is more the speed of the story of those swangs is fast .
Ups and downs in the story happen very hurriedly .
This flow of the story of swang sometimes becomes like a plateaued river and sometimes like the mountainous Ganga .
The story of swang does not happen in one place .
Man is an animal who lives relative to place time and circumstance .
The reality is that in today ` s era when man has become too eloquent , unfolding of character through only dialogues is not possible .
He proves the completeness and significance of his life only in the middle of circumstances and a manifold social life .
Another important element of swang is characters .
Without characters no event can even be imagined and without event , a developed lively personality of the characters also can not be imagined .
The number of characters in reality depends on the plot .
Even then , as far as the question of acting , normally there are about ten to fifteen characters in a swang .
The characters of swang can be divided into three parts from the worldly perspective - above man , man and other than man .
Goddess-Gods and liberated men can be counted in the above man characters .
Human characters are human only - Less than Gods and above demons , king , prince , princess , merchant , businessman moneylender , barber , washer-man , etc . .
These characters are human and all virtues-vices of a man are there in them .
In it , both idealistic and non-idealistic types of characters are there .
The characters of this category only are the real definers of public life .
The human characters of superior grade are pious people with divine tendencies - idealistic and religious minded .
The number of medium category of human characters is more as compared to superior category of characters .
These characters are common , virtues-vices both are present in them .
Low kind of human characters are those characters in whose demeanor no brightness in seen .
By nature these characters are jealous and are envious seeing the happiness of others .
The expression of their meanness happens in the form of a conspiracy .
Characters like animals , birds , demons , ghosts , genie can be placed in the below human type of characters .
From the point of view of development characters are made into two types in literary dramas - immovable and movable .
Immovable characters are those characters on whose behavior the influence of the situations is not seen .
They remain same in happiness-sadness , not just that , they remain same from the beginning to the end .
Others are those characters whose behavior in changeable .
When time comes they can be kind and when time comes they can also be harsh .
Both immovable and movable characters are there in folk-drama .
Where as , in mythological swangs there is abundance of immovable characters , there in social swangs movable characters are seen more .
Dhananjay has made a long list of 22 virtues of the hero of a drama .
It will be illogical to expect all these virtues in the hero of a folk-drama .
The heroes of folk-drama do not come in the ranks of scientific drama .
The hero of a swang can be any such person who has the ability to entertain people , who represents a particular group of this public and who also has some unique qualities .
It is not mandatory that the person be from a royal or a respected upper class family to be the hero of a swang .
In religious and mythological swangs , swang writers choose only those characters as hero of their story who along with public-entertainment , also have the ability for public-protection .
The hero of a swang in reality is the symbol of an actual human .
He walks tying along the boundaries of idealism and reality , touching them he moves on .
In some heroes , his virtues crossing the boundary of humans , start touching the boundaries of Godliness .
Such kind of men get hero-status in mythological and religious swangs only .
The hero of swangs is probably made of two opposite elements .
In his nature , if there is the coolness of sandal , there is the heat of fire too , if there is the fragrance of flowers , there is the prick of thorns too .
Along with the hero , among male characters , there are some of his fellow friends and some servants also .
Among male characters there is one character , the joker .
This characters is found in all swangs .
His job is only to entertain the audience from time to time .
His clothes and his talking are mostly awkward and disorderly .
The audience starts laughing as soon as he stands .
The number of female characters in swang is not more .
In the name of female characters there is only heroine , villainess , friends of the heroine , housemaids etc . .
Just as in swangs some friend is found with the hero , similarly in these swangs the helper of the heroine , one friend is always seen everywhere .
Not only does she help the heroine in happiness-sadness but also mostly she is behind her like a shadow .
Courage , bravery , beauty , cleverness , strength , etc . virtues are defined in the heroine of swangs .
Love is mostly the inspiring emotion of most stories of swangs .
This is the reason that their heroines are exceptionally adorned with virtues of looks beauty etc . .
Due to this incomparable beauty only , first glance or by just seeing the picture , the hero gets so enamored by her that he loses his presence of mind .
The heroines of swang are also very gentle by nature similar to their beauty .
These heroines are real Indian women both in the form of a beloved or wife .
They keep taking hold of silence , sacrifice , courage and bravery to get their love , to cajole or to bring to right path their sulking husband .
They are in the real sense devoted lovers .
On the other hand they are a wife in the real sense , he only remains their husband whom they have chosen as husband once .
Two types of female characters are found in swangs - some women are sweet and of loving nature while as some women are of jealous nature .
In the other type of women mostly second wife , aunt and sister-in-law are only seen .
If there is any most important element in a drama or any essay or story-literature then that is characterization of the characters or humans .
Actually , literature ultimately is just an emotive expression of life .
The basis of events that is used for characterization in literary dramas is not present in swangs .
With that , the drama like psychological and psychoanalytic process is also not used here .
Actually , the audience of swang are also not so expert and discreet that they fall in the maze of psychology or analyze the scenes and events .
These straight-simple people simply can understand the things said in a straight and simple manner in a straight-simple language .
Probably keeping only this fact in mind , when swang writers want to say something about some topic , then they say it in a common understandable language through the medium of vaartaa or through the medium of a ragini that straightly impresses the heart like a spear .
The place and time to which the story of the drama is related , the picturization of that place and time is called place , time and environment .
In a drama a dramatist probably has three means to present this picture - the props presented on the stage , the costumes of the characters and dialogues of the characters .
The stage of the swangs is very simple on which props can not be presented .
Thus , in these swangs , the question of giving introduction of the place-time through the medium of stage is over .
No special awareness is seen among swang performers about costumes .
There may be two reasons for this .
First , the knowledge of a swang writer is so less , his nature is straight-simple that he can not think anything in this direction .
The other important thing is that he is not so affluent that he gets made different-different clothes for different-different swangs .
So it is difficult to get the full idea of the place-time of the swang from the costumes of the characters on the swang .
The element of place and time is present in swangs but in a very subtle form .
In swangs this element is implicit in the introduction of the story given by the swang performer in the beginning and in the raginis themselves .
Sometimes it ` s glimpse in found in the dialogues of the characters also .
But even then the autenticity of the place and time presented in swangs is doubtful .
Through the medium of swangs the picture of the particular era does not appear in front of us .
Although related to a particular era , the material available in the form of place and time , remains in the form of a part of cultural legacy got from tradition .
The third special thing is that he does not have all the required means with the meduim of which he can present the picturizarion of the environment or the place-time .
Storytelling is considered a very important element of visible poetry since the dramatization of a drama is dependent only on skillful dialogues .
This is that element whose superiority can give literary excellence to a drama .
In swangs only that process of storytelling is adopted which puts straight and deep effect on the minds of the people .
In swangs the dialogues probably satisfy all the requirements of a drama .
These dialogues fully help in moving the story ahead , expressing the mental state of the characters , picturing the event or situation , creating the emotion etc . .
Somewhere in these dialogues , the easy expression of classical virtues is seen and somewhere the gravity of the situation is also seen .
These dialogues give unique help in the characterization of the characters .
In these dialogues the characters of both the actors -LRB- speaker and hearer -RRB- are described , with that , many times light is thrown upon a third character also .
One speciality of the dialogues of swangs is also that in places of advice mythological events are referred to in these dialogues .
Prosaic dialogues are also found in swangs .
The effect of a dialogues is more on it ` s rendition than the words .
If cautiously the dialogues are not uttered with right intonations then the possibility of the expected emotional experience should not be done .
There should be sweetness in the utterance of the words .
The correct rhythm in speaking is also mandatory .
Swang performers read the dialogues with great expertise .
At the time of saying the dialogues the voice of the actors is sufficiently loud .
Neither they need a loud speaker nor do the audience .
According to the dialogues the gestures of the characters also keep contributing to their expression .
The work of language is expressing emotion .
The language in which the ability of expression of emotion is strong that language will be more successful and competent .
The language of these swangs is the language of local vernacular .
English and Urdu words are also found in them here and there .
Here the king and citizens , landlords and farmers , heroine , her maids and the female gardener etc . all characters use only one language .
Keeping in view the difference in the topic also there is no difference in the language of all types of stories , mythological , romantic , social etc . .
This thing can be improper from the scientific view point for once but it has importance from the viewpoint of public-behavior .
One speciality of the language of a drama should be that the language should not be away from the understanding of the viewers or audience .
Keeping this in view , the swang writer has chosen the popular language as a medium of expression for all types of his characte .
The thing about language being suited to the character and suitable for the topic can be accepted but this does not ever mean that it becoming suited for the characters becomes incomprehensible for the audience .
The speciality of the style of these swangs is informality .
Whatever is said there is said in a straight way in a simple and straight language only .
Both swang performers and spectators get happiness in presenting the simple thing in mind in a simple way .
Swang writers have given introduction of their complete skillfulness in the description of a woman ` s beauty .
They present the incomparable luster of the beauty of every body part of a woman with their new similes .
Their sense of imagination takes a stunning form here .
Chronology is also seen in these swangs .
This chronology is found mostly in the vaartaa .
The way of speaking in swangs is like in some detective stories .
While describing eroticism , the folk-poet ` s imagination starts flying .
In these situations , his speciality is that he uses only semaphoric and figurative style .
The performance of swang is organized during social festivals or auspicious occasions of social or personal importance .
In some or the other form all these occasions are a chance for social merrymaking .
On such occasions organization of only humorous programs is done .
It is proved by this that organization of performances of swangs is done only for the merriment of the public .
The intention of the swangs created taking mythological stories is mainly establishing ethical beliefs .
Without usage there is no substance of any thing .
The substance of swang is also in its usage and that usage is that swang strives in the direction of public education also along with entertainment .
They are not just means of amusing the heart but also of strengthening the heart .
This has been an established fact in the form of literature that justice may or may not be gotten in life but in the world of literature justice should always be got .
In the field of literature there can be disagreement on the matter of poetic-justice .
But in the field of folk literature there is no disagreement in the matter of poetic-justice .
The known-unknown creator of folk-literature maintains poetic-justice even though being ignorant about words like poetic-justice .
The hero gets the fruit of his desires and the person with bad tendencies obstructing his path of getting the fruits always gets defeated .
From the above discussion it is clear that all the mandatory elements of a drama are present in swangs in some form or the other .
Drama and theater is a medium of presenting the periphery of human experience in an effective way .
Actually the effectiveness of theater is unlimited and unbeatable .
Different things said either against or for theater definitely prove this that alternatively both it ` s promoters and opponents accept the influencing power of theater .
The developed form of theater which was presented by Sage Bharat in his book , definitely that developed form of theater is not the evolution of one day .
It must have taken that form only by the long tradition of protection by the state and the public .
The secret of the effectiveness of theater and drama is that psychological saying in which it is said that `` There is only a two finger distance between the eyes and ears . `` .
The gist is that anything seen with the eyes is more believable , it ` s effect is more broad .
Eyes are more believable than ears .
Both the sense organs are working in a theater and anything that an emotional sees , that is able to make a mark on his mind .
The discussion done above on theater and drama is centered on literary theater .
This literary theater is the theater of the entire public .
The dramas presented on this stage are literary dramas , not the folk dramas .
There are not many spectators-readers of this stage and the dramas presented on them .
It is not difficult comprehend this thing that if there is such deep effectiveness of the theater limited to a particular class then how deep will be the effectiveness of folk-theater and folk-dramas .
Folk-theater is the theater of all the people of some area , not only of some educated people .
Our country and especially the Hindi-speaking regions realized the power of folk-drama and folk theater very late .
It is a myth that Sage Bharat wrote his Natya Shastra for advancing the art of drama by inspiration of some Goddess .
Indra , Varun and other Gods requested Brahma to give them some means of getting happiness which is also visual , also audio and from which all people of the society can get happiness .
Brahma accepted this request of the Gods and created the fifth veda .
For this fifth veda Brahma chose dialogues from the Rigveda , songs from the Samaveda , acting from the Yajurveda and the emotions from the Atharvaveda .
Later Shankar added Tandava and Parvati Lasya dance to it .
Brahma made the theater , taught the actors and then for the entertainment of the people gave the responsibility of bringing drama to the earth to Sage Bharat .
Sage Bharat writing the Natya Shastra for discussing the doctrines of drama , advanced the art of drama .
Folk-drama and folk-theater have still not been able to find such a Sage Bharat who systematically doing a scientific discussion of folk-dramas , would travel through the borders of it ` s powers .
But where , inspite of getting a person like Sage Bharat , Indian theater and literary drama activity have stopped at times and sometimes they have also compromised with the situation to impede their form , there folk-drama and folk theater have been always moving .
It has been moving even without any preceptor , it has been growing even without any royal protection .
Folk theater is a holy trend which is seen from the viewpoint of faith , the acts presented in it are available to all , accepted by all and public entertaining .
Actually , due its simplicity and non-pompousness only it is more close to public-life and public mind .
The public life whom the swang writers making the basis wrote the swangs , that is free from the greed of futile presentation .
The non-pompousness and informality of their life is reflected in their literature also .
Compared to the huge auditoriums of cities the stage of a swang is very straight-simple .
This stage is under the open sky .
The stage of swang is square which is made with the help of 4-6 boards .
On this simple stage made of boards , a carpet and moonlight is laid for the actors and saajinda to sit .
Now a canopy is also being put above .
On this square stage the coming-going of the actors happens in front of the audience only .
There is no provision of curtain and backstage etc . .
Where the swang performer reaches the stage also reaches with him .
All these characters sit in such a way that there is space left to roam around all four sides of of the stage .
In the remaining space on all four sides only the actors do their work .
Going around this place only they walk the distance of hundreds of miles in one second with one doha or chaubola .
In one corner of the stage on some raised object , fire is kept in a pan .
There is no cultural or symbolic importance of this fire , but sometimes the kettle-drum beater warms his kettle-drum as per necessity .
Occasionally this fire is also used for the hookah of these swang performers .
This is the stage of a swang - straight-simple , can be made without special efforts , without any discomfort whenever , wherever desired .
Compared to the characters of a movie the characters of a swang make use of very light and simple costume .
Till sometime before today , the village in which the swang performers would go , would make arrangements of the required clothes from that village only and if there were more than one piazza then everyday the costumes of the females would be changed .
But today due to many reasons most performers keep their own personal provision .
The number of male characters playing the characters of females is mostly fixed in a swang .
So , the female costumes for those 4-5 characters are made in the beginning only .
In this way their costumes remain same all the days .
Male characters have their own normal costumes only everyday .
Till they don ` t get the chance to play a really particular role , till then there is no question of change in costumes in them .
In this way , if seen from the point of view of comparison , in a swang some more attention is given to the costume of female characters than male characters .
The troupe which presents some swangs in high quality , they even make the heroine wear a saree .
Clearly this change is the result of the changed circumstances .
The costumes of men is very simple .
Mostly loincloth and tunic are used .
Now shirt and pajamas are also trending .
Almost all young actors make use of pajamas .
To disguise as a sage or mendicant , a yellow color gown is put on top of the previous costume and with that sometimes a false beard is put .
Actually by just a glimpse of the costume only it is clear as to which character is going to do which role or is doing which role .
By wearing of loincloth , manner of holding of stick , a character becomes a king or mendicant , a learned man or farmer , minister or soldier .
In female characters dupatta - then it may be a stoll on a salwar suit or a dupatta on a ghagra kameez and it may be the palla of a saree - it has a special place .
The use of this stoll is done in such a manner that the amazing facial expression of the actor keeps peeping from some corner or the other of it .
The thing in the heart of the actor which is not covered in the words of a ragini , that flickers effortlessly taking the screen of this stoll .
Through the style of placing the stoll on the head and changes in the facial expression the mentality of the characters is partially expressed .
The best skillful art of the folk-drama glitters in this .
For romance these folk-artists make use of kumkum , chalk , ocher , kohl , misri , cream , powder , blush , nail polish , etc . .
Female characters have ghunghru tied to their feet which show their shimmer at the time of dance .
In the form of jewellery these people only use the common jewellery .
With the coming of salwar kameez these people have slowly started reducing the use of jewellery .
For the entertainment of the public there is one mimic also in these swangs who does the work of a joker .
Queerness is the source of laughter , according to this saying , although his costume is very simple but it is worn in such a way that just on seeing it the audience suddenly bursts into laughter .
These people make use of ink of a pan to make their beard and mustache .
At the time of enacting Gods , demons and animals-birds , necessary masks are worn on the face .
Sometimes to make people laugh also , off the topic , they stand wearing these masks and unnecessarily interrupt in the dialogues of other characters .
May be these days swang performers do not want to perform swang in the night .
So there is no need to make arrangements for lights .
Earlier when swangs used to be played in the night , arrangement of flambeau used to be done .
Dipped in castor oil these flambeaux used to spread light in all four directions .
These days for some reasons if the swang performers have to play the swang at night then gas lanterns are used for light .
One lantern is tied to each pole standing on four corners of the canopy and on necessity one lantern is hung in the middle of the canopy near the actors .
Where in cities , performance of swang is done at night , there , now electricity is being used in place of lanterns .
For the successful performance of a new swang it is necessary that all members of the swang troupe do some background study together .
For the background study of a new swang , minimum time of 30-35 days is expected .
Yes , an old swang can be played by just one day of preparation and sometimes even without it .
In background study the master explains the plot of the swang to members of his troupe and decides their roles for different characters .
All the people enact their own parts .
Prompting system arranged in literary dramas for the help of the actors , is not used here .
Through vaartaa , the hero himself gives the information about different activities of the plot .
The people come sit on all four sides of this stage which is open from all four sides .
Open land is available till afar for sitting .
Wherever ones mind feels and wherever one finds place he can sit there .
Here the arrangement to sit also is away from position and class .
One who came first he sat in front , one who came later he sat behind .
In these swangs organized in cities sometimes separate arrangement is also made for women to sit .
But in villages , they have to sit on the roofs of houses made surrounding the acting place .
These spectators gathering in the swang performance are uninvited , they do not even expect an invitation .
The reality is that they do not need invitation , just information .
They don ` t have to buy a ticket etc . also to see the swang .
Yes , it is for sure that during the performance or by being satisfied by some particular scene they can give whatever they want according to their wish .
There is no particular problem about discipline in these performances .
Where do these engrossed people have that much time that they will fight with each other .
Yes sometimes there definitely happens some tiff on the topic of sitting etc . .
The audience themselves does the settlement of these trivial fights .
One organizer of the troupe leader , in other words , the master of the swang troupe is necessary to be .
In one swang troupe there are 12 to 20 members .
To keep maintaining organization among these 20 people of different habits-thinking and tastes is not a simple task .
The successful performance of swang does not depend only on one person but on the co-operation of all the members of the troupe , the responsibility of maintaining this co-operation is on the hero of the troupe .
In this situation is it clearly known how much diplomatic a swang performer should be .
Many temptations are also given to the good actors from each others troupe to bring them in their own troupe .
Normally , good swang performers take 400 rupees to 700 rupees for one day of performance -LRB- which they call chowk -RRB- .
In the middle of the performance the money that audience themselves give being happy , that sometimes is of the swang performer only , in other words , it is not related to the fixed price .
Sometimes it ` s full account is kept and this amount is deducted from the fixed amount .
Those swangs come in the second category of performance which are played to collect funds for school , dharmashala or temple , etc . .
In this type of performances , swang performers take money thinking their work is for charity .
In these performances the money that the audience gives in the name of swang performer or some particular actor that is considered as his .
But the money which they give for the particular organization for which the performance is being held that goes to the organization only .
Later from that amount the swang performer is given his fixed amount .
The amount that the audience themselves gives from self inspiration , only that amount is gotten by the troupe .
That can be one rupee also and one thousand also .
These performances the swang troupes -LRB- do -RRB- in the free time , in other words , when here is no saai -LRB- the advance amount given for some performance -RRB- on them , that time -LRB- they -RRB- do .
The rupees that the audience gives in the middle of all these types of performances , the swang performer announces their name along with the village .
Along with this announcement , he also says benedictory words for the donor .
In this way money obtained from all classes is divided among the swang troupe .
The complete responsibility of it ` s division is on the hero of the troupe -LRB- who is called akhade band -RRB- .
Among the members of the troupe , two people -LRB- barber and cook -RRB- are on daily wage .
As many days the performance is done , their wage is given accordingly .
Remaining money is divided among the various members of the troupe .
In the middle of the performance , being impressed by the acting of some characters , the money that audience gives on the name of that character is completely his .
No right of the troupe or the master is considered on it .
This stage of swang is not just a means of entertainment but also an important means of national renaissance and revolution also .
Social issues come forth through nautanki , with that there is contribution of nautanki in spreading the national spirit also .
The topics and message coming from this stage has a direct and deep effect on the people because of the depth and dramatics .
Unknowingly this effect falls on him , these advice are not given by informing .
Reference to the current form of stage of swang is found in different books but no sequential discussion is not found of it ` s earlier form .
The one and only medium of knowing the evolution of the stage of swang is - knowing of earlier stage of swang from today ` s swang performers .
Being bound by the teacher-disciple tradition , they definitely keep some or the other information about the dramatic specialities of their earlier swang performers .
The effect of political situations , religious movements , financial crisis falls on literary dramas , not on folk-drama .
The circumstances in which the literary drama of Hindi could not stand , in those circumstances only folk drama stood a match .
Even in the growing complex situations of slavery and poverty , there was no danger on the existence of folk drama .
This effect certainly happened that , the particular role of the changes happening in a natural speed in theater faded .
The result of this was , Ram-Leela , Nautanki , Raas-Leela , Puppets , etc . could not move beyond the mental state of the 17th -18 th AD .
Where , sometimes , literary theater was placed ceremoniously in palaces or the premises of the superior class , there , when time came , sometimes , it had to get deported from there also .
Literary theater had to get deported even from the Muslim royal palaces .
But no question arises of deportation of folk theater .
Someone can come to the ground after being deported from the royal palace but one who stays on the ground only , what about his deportati ?
What was the initial state of this effective theater , no definite information on this topic is found .
This is certain that in the beginning this stage was not fixed , was moving .
With the stage of swang getting fixed , the system of dancing ` gharuda ` before the beginning of swang was born .
Gharuda is similar to the horse made of bamboo and paper .
It is made to dance from a lot of time before the beginning of the swang .
The intention of making the gharuda dance must have been giving information to the people about the starting of the swang .
Listening to the sounds of this dance , people used to start walking towards the acting venue making their own groups .
Eventually , the dance of gharuda stopped and only beating of the kettle-drum continued .
One speciality of these days was also that the stage had not become completely fixed even .
In some scenes the whole team and the whole gathering had to walk .
In the middle of the swang if a scene of the heroine going to the temple for worship or filling water from the well used to come , then the heroine herself used to go to the temple or well .
The heroine would walk singing and the musician would walk behind playing the instruments .
Behind them the whole gathering used to walk .
After worshiping or filling water all the people would return back in the same way .
In Bhagwanpur and Devband , even today those wells and temples are there which were constructed specially for the presentation of swangs .
The costume at that time was same which the masses would wear in their daily life .
The use of bushirt on top of a loincloth also could be seen .
Pant has definitely not yet come on the stage .
For the acting of female characters of noble families , silk clothes were used .
More change happened in the costumes of the female characters after some days and salwar and tunic started to be used in place of ghagra and stole .
In accordance to situation and time the feeling of nationality keeps changing .
The form of national spirit is seen changing from the perspective of movement , aim intent and thought process .
Before-independence , the main aim of nationality was independence .
It ` s fight was with imperialistic policy-process and it ` s road was of sacrifice and renouncement .
The question of nation building was in front of independent India .
Along with new-building and big-planning , came a situation of human breakdown and dream shattering .
There has been a very ancient bond of literature to national feeling .
According to one scholar , `` The question of nationality is related to collective life , collective development and collective self-respect `` .
Every country is advanced in the creation of literature taking it ` s generic specialities .
All that literature can be taken under national literature , which is introductory of some country ` s generic specialities and which may implant in the people , love , respect and it ` s defense towards their country .
National literature is used most for that literature in which the feeling of love for the country is strong .
Among the various genre of literature , drama has been most inspired by this feeling .
Literary drama and folk-drama are more their own of the common people because in it the natural and effortless expression of the zeal of life is found , not the artistic and effortful expression .
The amount of successful expression of love for country , mass-awakening and mass-education has been possible through the medium of swangs , that much has not been through any other genre of folk-drama .
Theater is not just a means of entertainment but is an important means of national renaissance and revolution .
The biggest proof of the effectiveness of stage is the drama regulation -LRB- 1876 AD -RRB- passed by the British .
The capacity of shouldering the responsibility of national renaissance and revolution can be in that literature only whose scope , not being narrow , is wide .
Swang has shouldered this responsibility thoroughly .
Actually , the need for national awakening happens only in some special types of situations - in the situations of absence of mass-education , deterioration of values of life , battle and war .
Swang writers understood these special situations and according to them wrote and plated swangs .
Amazing effect of these swangs also fell on the people .
It is the inherent speciality of swang art which has bound people even in the dreadful situation of battle and war , has been teaching lessons of war bravery , sacrifice and prowess of charity in the interest of the country .
People used to rush to see the swangs written at the time of India-China war and India-Pak clash .
The proof of their popularity is the gathering of people in thousands without any propagation or advertisement .
For the publicity of these swangs nobody is informed with a loud speaker nor any support is taken of any other means of advertisement .
The information of the performance of swang reaches from one ear to another in lightening speed and as time approaches , spectators reach in groups of five , ten from a distance of ten , twenty miles .
Whether it is about national awakening or mass-education , spectators see the swang engrossedly .
To see a movie based on love for country or patriotism , nobody gets excited soon .
Even if taking money out of his pocket he somehow buys a ticket , even then it becomes difficult for him to sit in one place for hours .
When on the other side there are such examples also that after seeing the swang the audience on it ` s own wish has put loads of money in the bag of the swang performer .
The money that many swang performers collect from the enacting of swangs donate it to works of national-interest - building of dharmashala , schools etc . .
This work of the swang performers inspires love for the country in the mind of the common people also .
A very big reason behind getting influenced by seeing the swang is that the happiness of the story and the flow of the story of swang is so powerful that the audience gets engrossed in it .
A swang performer does the difficult work of mass-education in such a simple-natural way that the audience gets influenced by it but does not feel that someone is giving him an advice .
From this is it clear how able the stage of swang is for the people .
That is why swangs have been the necklace of the people for ages .
One instance of people getting influenced is mentionable .
Pt . Deepchand was not only a skillful singer of swang art but also a teacher of it .
There was an amazing magic in his vocals .
His raagini did the work of a bugle among the people .
In the war period against the British in the 1857 uprising how could the trailblazing people accept that they get recruited in the army of the British .
The British worked with ethics and intelligence .
British officers were acquainted with the effect of the raaginis of Pt . Deepchand .
So they made use of Pt . Deepchand ` s effective vocals for this work .
The abovesaid example of the effectiveness of swangs proves that through these swangs , a feeling of collaboration can be inspired even towards the opposite party .
A soft feeling towards our country is present in the minds of the people themselves .
Along with this , these people , even today , like Pt . Deepchand , make recruitment in the army etc . .
There is a complementary relationship of swang and life , both mutually ignite and inspire each other .
In them , there is a reciprocal reaction of actor and era .
In literature fired with love for country , there is heavy influence of passion , zeal and along with it valor .
In swangs this feeling has been a main ingredient of people ` s taste .
Swang performers do not write-enact swangs just for entertainment , closing their eyes towards the changed situations of the society and nation , but awakening is also an important intention of their art .
China attacked on India .
The swang performer aware about the situations in such times , to remind the people of the duty towards the country only , created the swang ` Bharat-Cheen ` .
By seeing the swangs inspired by the spirit of love for the country again and again also people do not feel satiated .
After seeing one film of cinema , a normal spectator -LRB- does not -RRB- try to see it ever again .
The main reason for the success of these swangs based on love for country is for sure the intrinsic quality of this art , along with that the alertness of the swang performer towards the country and the feeling of sense of responsibility are also the reasons .
Although the situation of the swang performer with respect to finance is the same even today which was fifty years back , but because of this no deviation has come in the capacity of expression of a swang performer .
Inspite of his financial limitations , he tries to understand the ever changing nature of nationality .
Even though the swang performer is not very educated himself , he has not taken lessons in philosophy and science , but his experience and his practical knowledge is always active in national-interest .
He understands the contemporary situations and activities of the country and is conveying this fact through the medium of his swangs to many people .
Not only this , all the life values needed for moving any nation on the path of progress , making it powerful and it ` s upliftment , all those are stuffed in swangs .
Even after analyzing the entire swang literature , not even one swang will be found which does not have some or the other life value .
Patriotism and love for country is filled in his every vein , whose spray he throws on the audience even in romantic swangs .
If a swang composed on the life of Satyvadi Harishchandra gives the inspiration of dieing for truth and abiding by duties to people , then the swang based on the life Bharthari -LRB- gives inspiration -RRB- of sacrifice .
If the swang written on Maharana Pratap invokes the feeling of caste equality , bravery and courage in the mind of the spectator , then ` Lilo Chaman ` and ` Roopkala Jadoo Khori ` swangs compel to think about contemporary events also .
An enemy should never be considered weak , by talking about ceasefire also never get trapped in his plans , he can deceive anytime , this lesson also is got from these swangs .
Swangs like ` Devar-Bhabhi ` and ` Badal ` teach us our social responsibility .
All swangs , in some or the other form , are a unique example of public awakening and public entertainment .
Before this , such a serious and deep wound on the rusting beliefs-traditions of the journalism had never happened .
This new type of journalism not only established in such a less time but it also forced the traditional ' houses ' of journalism that they accept , embrace it .
