It ` s a quite obvious fact that without the development of technology of camera and invention of photography , neither cinema would be nor television .
The story of invention of camera and photography is so long and so old - even spread over many centuries .
Like many other inventions , credit of inventions of both of these also can not be given to any single person .
Similarly , many people give credit of invention of camera to Nicéphore Niépce , who made first box camera in 1824 .
Indeed , keeping the model of Niépce ` s box camera in mind , while making gradual improvement and technological refinement , after contribution of so many peoples , at last Franke and Heidecke together had made first modern reflex camera with two lenses in 1938 .
This was a only precondition for the invention of cinema and television .
Mention of use of ` Camera Obscura ` in a tent by Medieval Arabs also found , it means there are enough source to believe in this that methods of making pictures on the basis of optical principles were developing by alchemist and scientist since very old days .
We know that if light passes through a needle-point hole in dense darkness , image of outside object appears upside down on inner wall .
It is exactly like our eye .
Our irises are like a two lenses camera .
Their mix reflection reflects on ratina located behind our irises .
Due to result of complex process of the mind this mixed one reflection appears also straightforward .
An another inventor Johann John has done a new thing during his experiments that instead of oily paper , in 1985 used dim glass on the inside screen of the camera .
John was a famous and talented ` optician ` .
Thus , till the end of seventeenth century a very basic camera came into existence , but till now efforts could not succeed to make permanent image reflecting on its screen .
However these efforts were being made since very long and many experimenters from various countries were engaged in these .
On the other side , a another experimenter famous English chemist Robert Boyle has also seen during his various kind of experiments that color of silver-salt solution changes in freaky manner in the sunlight .
Famous chemist from Sweden Charles William Scheele -RRB- has made various efforts to know effect of lights of various colors while doing such experiments mixing lights of various colors with Silver Chloride in 1777 .
After few years , this problem was permanently solve with a invention by Sir John Herschel of a chemical Sodium Thio-Sulphate .
Now this became possible to permanently save picture clicked by camera with the help of this newly search chemical .
Now , color of the picture would not have black even after keeping dunk in the solution of Sodium Thio-Sulphat for few moment , then keeping on keeping in sunlight after drying .
Foundation stone of this was laid by Nicéphore Niépce almost after 35 years .
Though findings of Niepce was of initial kinds , because after a long time Tolbott and Archar have made complete this technology of making negative on basis of these and making of positive from these -LRB- means proper and permanent photo -RRB- .
Niépce found success in his efforts suddenly in 1882 .
He has kept a bronze coated silver chloride plate in his camera obscura for long time while ` exposing ` -LRB- means clicking picture of his object on its the screen of this plate -RRB- whit vapor-particles of warmed iodine .
He did so because color of silver would be darken and its tone will not change too much .
Niepce has continuously done many improvements in his camera and thus made many updated model from ` Dabba Camera ` .
Only this ` dabba camera ` by Joseph Nicephore Niepce can truly be called ancestor of our modern camera .
After sometime in 1841 William Henry Fox Talbot has invented such a paper , on which clearly and fully sustainable positive -LRB- ie photos -RRB- could be made .
A German scientist Paul Ruddolph has achieved success in making of a complete Telephoto Lens first time .
After long court case and fights on 13 September 1898 patent was issued on the name of Paul Rudolph , however he had applied for this on 2 May , 1887 .
Thus we see that many people have notably contributed in the invention of camera and photography .
But one French painter Louis Jacques Man De Daguerra was most famous among these .
Louis Daguerra only was formally considered as a inventor of the photography .
But when in 1833 Neipse died , Louis Daguerre have kept on his experiments alone .
In 1835 he has coated a mixer of Silver Cholride and Iodide on metal plate .
Then he gave a three hours long ` exposer ` to this plate .
Even after the invention of camera and photography continuous improvement was being done while bringing updates in their technology .
For example , a such paper was made in 1900 while improving printing paper and emulsion , on which a better printing could be done in artificial light also .
Apart from this , now making of big print was also become possible .
It was called ` gaslight paper ` .
Needless to say that firstly normal , means only black and white pictured could be clicked .
Now with the development of film and color printing , phase of color photography is also started .
Parallel to this , approximately in the last decades of nineteenth century story of invention of motion-picture camera is also started .
Concept of motion picture and story of invention of ` movie ` camera is also very funny and interesting .
Indeed cinema and television are still images only , even it would be better to say that this is a chain of still images .
Illusion of ` motion ` in motion-picture and ` move ` in movie camera was searched in 1877 in America .
There is a interesting story behind this search .
The story is that this was a heated debate among American nobles that while horse runs in the horse race , Is there ever a situation comes when his all four legs fly in the r ?
Some people used to say that yes , such thing happens .
Contrary to this , maximum people considered that such thing can not happen .
Such believers said that Horse ` s three feet fly in the air , but always anyone foot rests on the ground .
In the process of race , horse with the help of this fourth foot , which stands for a moment , jumps and continuously moves forward .
This test was done in a manner that many photographers clicked several photographs quickly of racing horse , while standing in a line .
Thus , at last the decision was done of a costly bet of 25 thousand dollar .
Inadvertently a major discovery happened ! A new secret revealed .
On the basis of this invention only , the invention of cinematography and projector of cinema , thus cinema itself happened .
From this perspective invention of the cinema has became a main base of invention of television .
In the last decade of nineteenth century Lumiere brothers has made many small films and shown them in Europe and America .
They were extremely popular and soon many other people started making films and their show .
But these initial films were not talkies film , but they were silent films .
Means they were movie , but dialogue , song-music and sound were not there , means moving scenes were there , but sound was not .
As far as television is concern , usually photo frames is launched at the rate of 25 to 30 frame per second in these .
Motion-picture camera clicks these picture at the rate of 24 frames per second .
With its speed these are reflected on the screen .
Matter use to be somewhat different in television .
This process use to be somewhat more complex and more complicated .
Series of hundreds horizontal lines together make one by one photo frame in video camera .
With these lines different scale of colors and thousands points of the light exist in the form of information .
Scanning moves on in the form of light and shadow in television cameras of this information by micro-electronic process .
Indeed , this micro and technical process of scanning or scansion is the main base of modern television .
Similarly reaching in Photo Tube , scanning in every micro part of the light reflected by any image and scene happened .
This Photo Tube used to produce stream of current according to different quantity of light reflected upon it .
In this way , information of each and every smallest part of image and scene converted into a special kind of force of stream of electricity .
This information was sent to in cycle installed in an another part -LRB- B -RRB- through a cable of electricity .
Glow lamp used to be there at it ` s front .
Any image processes fram by fram by deconstructing itself in an order of shadow-light , lines of different colors and thousands micro points in television camera .
Then after electronic process by scanning series of these thousands points and lines continuously being together on the screen of television set .
After scansion method of Paul Nipko and electronic technique of Vladimir Jvorkhin , many other people have contributed in the field of invention of television by various experiments .
Among these , credit of invention of a complete television process based on camera-tube goes to Russian scientist Vladimir Jvorkhin .
He gave ` Iconoscope ` name to his this television technology of electronic scanning .
After three years Jvorkhin invented a television receiver while using one form of Cathode Rays .
No doubt in this that same time or some back and forth from each-other , but different scientist have developed television in any form , independently from each-other in different countries .
Starting of television happened very late in developing countries of third world including India .
Generally then , in seventh decade television was spread all around in Europe and America .
Moreover , pace of development of television was remained extremely slow for long in these countries .
Finally due to arrival of satellite TV this deadlock began to break speedily .
In the second half of the nineteenth century , method of transmission of visual from one place to another place parallel to successful journey of audio were being searched .
From this point of view sixth and seventh decades can called specially important and remarkable .
Ben had made such an electronic machine , by this still images could be transmitted to some distance .
Charles Frances Jenkins from America only had got patent of motion picture projector in 1895 by inventing it .
More speed came in the direction of invention of television system after existence of technique of transmission of motion picture by reflecting them on screen .
Cinema of Lumire brothers of France rocked America and Europe .
Apart from this , as we have mentioned earlier , one Russian scientist Constantin Perskyi had transmitted some pictures in the Paris exhibition in 1900 .
Perskyi himself had used the word ` television ` for the first time in the context of his this transmission .
` NOF ` transmission of Jekins use to happened on 1875 KHz while using 48 lines .
They had been using ` NOAF ` until 1925 .
He had applied for patent of his this method in Washington on 29 December 1923 .
Jenkins got first success in mix transmission of audio-visual on 13 June , 1923 .
Even than they called it synchronized Transmission of picture and sound , not calling it ` television ` .
First on Air TV station of ` DWGY ` started in America in December 1926 .
It ` s video was of 37.8 meter and Soud was of 7555 KHz .
Bell telephone company had transmitted its experimental TV station in the front of a large audiences in New York on 7 April and 23 May , 1927 .
First television transmission license was given to Jenkinson Laboratory by ` FRC ` .
But General Electric Company has done formal starting of television in America from 11 May , 1928 .
It had started his regular commercial TV programs of two hours from 1.30 noon to 3.30 noon thrice a week on Tuesday , Thursday and Friday .
Later when advertisements were began in commercial telecasts , transmission also began of sponsor program of serial stories -LRB- which were called ` soap opera ` -RRB- and Docu-drama .
Gradually , existing big companies of broadcast industry have also launched their television network and popularity of their television broadcasts begun to increase .
On the other hand in America , in 1930 in Boston , ` Boston on Air ` Company and in 1930 only , in Los Angeles Don lee company have started their TV stations .
In this very year big American multinational Media Corporations also entered in television telecast .
Among these , National Broadcasting Company started first television broadcasting on a wide level from 31 May 1930 .
After America , till the end of 1931 commercial broadcast of television was about to start in Britain also .
John Logie Baird in association with ` YMCA ` founded his television company on 18 October 1931 .
This company had started its first regular TV telecast on 22 December 1931 .
Form of the television in America , Britain and generally in all European countries was , as mentioned above , mainly of entertainment .
At the time of election of mayor of Chicago , first time in November 1930 election related news were transmitted on the television .
After this , on 8 November , 1932 Columbia Broadcasting Service has telecast its first TV report related to the election of American President .
That time more than 75 thousands people watched it on TV sets .
With this , television making industry experienced growth and suddenly prices of television sets began to fall gradually .
Television sets began to reach in the meddle class home in all big-small cities of America , Britain and other countries of the Europe .
Along with all three big multi-national television companies of America - ` NBC ` , ` CBS ` and ` ABC ` , ` BBC ` of Britain had also started regular daily TV news now .
In America daily transmission of news bulletins of 15-15 minutes began on ` NBC ` and ` CBS ` from 1946 .
On the other side , for ideological battle with media of Soviet Union and socialist countries and for with this for expansion of their impact area , western media has adopted strategy of making television also a ideological tool .
With this speciality of television , sepcially of TV news began to surfaced .
Objectivity , competition of first and foremost and proper analysis concerning professionalism in the context of news began to reflect , which consistently developed quality of television news .
Meanwhile , a new development happened in Europe in 1959 that European Broadcasting Union was founded , in which total 23 broadcasting institutions participated .
In the competition of ` EBU ` , ` BBC ` had to launch a new television company in 1955 .
Total scenario has been changed also in Britain and Europe with block buster starting of 24 hours news channels of Sky News of Ruport Murdock and global ` live coverage ` of world affairs .
In this pressure ` BBC ` also had to start its 24 hours news from 1997 .
This mutual competition was further increased in 2000 after a 24 hours news channel was launched by ` ITN ` for a short period of time -LRB- till 2005 -RRB- .
Today we are watching tremendous scenario of worldwide network of satellite television and cable network , which really caught not only globe in handful , but also whole universe .
Television in India started on 15 September 1959 , means after two and half decades later than America and Britain in the form of public mass communication .
At first television was started as a small department of established radio -LRB- All India Radio -RRB- .
Well before the invention of television broadcasting industry was enough developed in America .
Broadcasting industry was flourishing well in Europe also , particularly in Britain .
Enough progress was occurred in this field in Soviet Union and Japan .
Even broadcasting industry had flourished in colonies like India of Britain .
On the other side , Alexander Graham Bell with his six friends established a Bell telephone company in 1877 in America .
Western Electric Company has bought this company on the eve of 20th century .
This company is world wide famous with its nick name ` GE ` .
This company earned enough profit from the contract of making wireless tools for the military of American and allied countries .
Soon , it occupied large space in various industries including broadcasting industry .
This GE company use to come in limelight due to it relation with American war department ` Pentagon ` and American intelligence agency ` Central Intelligence Agency of America ` , and coup again independent governments of Latin American countries who do not obey american policies .
Oven Young of General Electrics launched a new company ` Radio Corporation of America ` in 1919 after world war and merged American Markoni in it after buying .
It ` s associate company ` United Fruit Company ` , who brings looted materials from Latin American countries to north American markets , needed it for mutual radio contact .
But these companies usually used to do activities of inciting rebellion and intervention against the autonomous governments of those countries .
Russian origin David Sarnoff become vice president of RCA by promotion from wireless operator .
Sarnoff became famous for disseminate information in all world standing in wireless station for 72 hours continuously at the time of sank of Titenic .
In 1922 he convinced the board of RCA for launching a big broadcasting company .
National Broadcasting Company has sold its Blue Network in 1934 .
From these a new company ` ABC ` came into existence .
This famous multinational company also has monopoly for many year in the broadcast industry .
Willam Paley of a company ` Congress Cigar Company ` has bought this famous CBS multi-national company in broadcasting industry later in September 1928 .
` CBS Network ` has done immense progress in the leadership of William Paley and expanded on a large scale .
On the other side after starting of ` British Broadcast Corporation ` in 1992 in Britain , gradually development of broadcast industry has started in Europe also .
Till the launching of commercial television , the broadcasting companies which were flourishing under big capital had been developed in big multinational companies .
Therefore , when television was started commercially , there was no immediate need of launching a separate broadcasting company and new television broadcasting industry in Europe and America .
For the television industry stablished base and network of these radio broadcasting companies was already existed .
After war like a big fish these big companies had swallowed these small companies by sharing among them .
During second world war these companies earned profit on large scale and further expanded their multi-national character on large scale .
Mainly three reasons surface for this sudden boom in both sector both expansion of broadcasting network and manufacturing sector of television industry .
First and foremost reason is that at the time of second world war America , who used to be neutral in world affairs , now emerged as a leader of western world on the place of Britain .
Third prominent reason was that after second world war introvert trend and neutrality of American middle class suddenly disappeared .
Now American middle class , specially young generation started taking interest in world affairs and internal politics more in comparison to earlier .
As a result of this new trend , unprecedented growth has been recorded in television industry in Europe and America .
Though color transmission have been started from 1946 , but now after its popularity the phase of growth and continuous growth started , which never stopped after that .
Though color transmission has started years ago , but its large scale expansion was happened only after sixty .
Similarly , after launching of first satellite ` Telestar ` in the space by America , gradually a boom came again in television industry on starting of satellite broadcasting and satellite TV in America and Europe .
In second half of 80s and starting of 90s several channel were started on cable TV and direct satellite television system and its worldwide broadcast Began .
According to a research done in this context in America cable TV is one fourth means more than 24 percent of total television broadcasting .
After 2 years of its launching in 1982 when 24 hours news transmission was started by Cable News Network , once again a tremendous boom has been recorded in the industry .
Currently CNN , SKY News and BBC only are spread all around the world .
CNN is at the forefront among these three also .
If development of television was a result of politics of cold war after second world war , satellite television is symbol of current age of globalisation .
If television was a symbol of modernity , satellite TV is symbol of post-modernity .
It has announced the end of all ideologies and history .
Simply , Whatever it is , it i .
It neither needs any context , nor history nor any perspective .
This is the height that it has made the ` information ` a mere substitute of ideology .
Needless to say that it is a dangerous ideology in itself .
Modern literature had made people serious reader on a large scale .
If Radio had produced listeners , cinema and television the audience .
Any kind of social responsibility , human values or some radical change can not be expected from such thoughtless , sense less puppets .
This is very necessary for a good television journalist to know that the magnificent and positive imaginations of development of world humanity and international cooperation attached with launching of satellite communication , how that changed today in political , economical and cultural attacks of information imperialism .
All developing world including India is on the verge of this invisible attack .
One can not become a truthful , honest and professionally better audio-visual journalist without well understanding of this audio-visual fraud of this satellite TV .
This clear understanding of his Media is necessary for a good television journalist .
Though initial experiments of live telecast direct from satellite and prior to it ` recorded telecast ` was done in the first half of sixth decade .
But regular and systemic starting of satellite TV can be considered from launching of satellite channel of 24 hours news in 1982 after High Definition Television in 1881 .
America was running almost 5 year behind from Soviet Union in Space Science , Space-craft and Rocketary and Satellite Technology .
Therefore if Soviet Union has right of credit for satellite communication and television , America is responsible for developing sapce-war technology and satellite TV and its current characteristic .
Anyways , at first we should be informed about this science and history of its technical history , then short outline of the history of satellite TV can be understood .
From the study of scientific inventions and history of science it is clearly known that human mind has done imagination of many inventions well in advance .
Several such invention and scientific events found in literary works of science fiction which we see as it is after many years .
In nineteenth century Kibalvich was also one of the Russian revolutionaries who were jailed in Tsarist dictatorship .
All day and night they used to design rockets of traveling from Earth to space on the paper .
His jail-diary is full of these maps and mathematical formulas calculating speed of rockets .
Before his death Kibalvich has done real description a model of space-vehicle invented by him .
Thus , this great Russian revolutionary has put foundation stones of space science and rocket technology while sitting in the jail of Tsar .
Two research papers were presented on 23 November , 1986 at Science Academy of France .
One of them Muassan had told the method of getting pure uranium .
In another , Becquerel had told about ` radiation ` -LRB- vikiran -RRB- of the uranium .
Brilliant polish student Many Sklodovaskaya who was studying in Paris started research work by making her work on the research of Bekkerel .
This Madam Curie not only searched the radium but also presented study and analysis of chemical reactions of radio - active of thorium and uranium in association with his husband Dr . Pyer Curie in 1898 .
While doing this Curie couple had indicated possibilities of nuclear blast in nuclear of uranium .
Great scientist Albert Einstein -LRB- 1879-1955 -RRB- has given his famous formula of E = Mc2 related to energy of dynamic mass in 1907 after two year of invention of special theory of relativity in 1905 .
In period of less than four decades this value of ` E ` manifested so horrific that the whole world was shaken by this .
America has shown a practical but inhuman form of Albert Einstein ` s formula n 1945 by bombing Hiroshima and Nagasaki in Japan .
In Soviet Union also a group of prominent scientist in the leadership of famous physician Igor Vasilyevich Kurchatov was developing nuclear science during second world war .
But his this direction was completely different .
In complete contrast to American intentions Soviet scientist were searching methods of use of nuclear power for peaceful projects .
Two world-famous discoveries surfaced of his this great research .
First , Soviet Union has opened first nuclear powerhouse of the world on 27 June , 1954 by making first nuclear ` Reactor ` .
We know that due to gravity of earth , anything which is thrown up , falls back down .
If nuclear fuel driven rocket will go up with the speed of 8 kilometer per second , that will reach into space by crossing gravity circle of the earth and start rotating around earth .
As it is mentioned above that by launching first satellite ` Sputanik-1 ` in space on 4 October , 1957 , Soviet Union had inaugurated the space-age .
Clear signals were found from this satellite , and he also received signal sent from earth .
After it , several other satellite of ` Sputanik ` category were also launched . .
This thing was Imagine prior to one and half decade of it .
In this small period of time such a fast growth of science and technology was surprising .
Possibility of transmission from outer space was expressed by a British radio engineer Arthur C . Clark .
He had presented an outline of space broadcasting through an artificial satellite in his famous article ` Vai Parthiv Rele ` published in famous science magazine of Britain ` Wireless World ` in May , 1945 .
Neither any factory was stablished nor any special awareness produced by this paper of Aurther C . Clack .
Though this paper was considered interesting , but along with this it is also considered that it was written with speculations , which , may be become true in far future .
But Aurther Clark was not any speculator that his arguments should not be taken seriously .
He was a reputed radio engineer .
If the contribution of these above mentioned inventions not happened , first Soviet satellite ` Sputanik ` would not have launched successfully .
Then , obviously imagination of direct television telecast -LRB- means satellite TV -RRB- couldn ` t take real form .
But along with only , around 1948 , most reduction of electronic circuits due to prevalence of transistors and safe storage of huge stores of information due to development of micro chips became possible .
Contribution of this development of science is beyond doubt in this complete process .
Apart from this , without semi-conductors this scientific progress was not possible .
After ` Telestar ` in 1962 , America has launched ` Rely ` in 1963 , ` Synchom ` in 1964 and ` Arliword satellite in the space .
Satellite telecast became possible in America and Europe because of ` Aliworld ` particularly among these .
On the other side , after successful launching of various satellites of many developed series after ` Vostok ` Soviet Union placed a satellite of ` Molnia ` category in the space .
` Molnia ` means ` light ` in Russian language , means sky light .
This was only starting of ` live telecast ` through satellite telecast of experimental color television in Soviet Union .
Non-stope telecast was done for 8 to 9 hours in remote areas also by this .
Technology was developed .
But this technology will give profit or not even after high investment , and if yes how much , development of understanding of this business is also awaited .
At last , at the end of 80s , not only this business understanding was completely developed , but new strategy of news politics emerging from market-orient new economic policies of globalisation also developed accordingly .
Though lately , but Media power of America Ted Turner had understood first this massage of media .
Turner has founded the Cable News Network on 1 June , 1980 as a department of his Turner Broadcasting System ` .
Soon he launched 24 hours news first with the name of ` CNN-2 ` , and then with the name of ` Headline News ` .
Soon , 24 hours news of CNN rocked all world .
After looking at great successes of CNN Media Mughal Rupart Murdok also also launched his own 24 hours news channel Sky News in 1989 .
Murdoc has started hard efforts to extend his own satellite television system by collaborating with local channels of Bangkok and Singapore including India for solidify its steps in the Asia .
After trailing in competition with these , compelled BBC had to launched its satellite system of 24 hours news in 1997 .
But transmitting Gulf war for 24 hours non-stop , CNN has made all other trailing in 1990 .
No doubt in it that today no one is in competition with CNN of Ted Turner in the field of satellite television broadcasting .
After their mutual competition only ` Sky news ` of Murdok and ` BBC ` are able to stand ahead of CNN .
CNN has 42 chief main news bureau and more than 900 affiliated station all around the world .
Today we are witnessing this reality that Satellite TV arbitrarily telecasting by shamelessly violating legitimacy and national sovereignty of any country and violating international laws .
Specially , these satellite TV transmission has taken a form of ideological and cultural attack of information-imperialism in developing countries .
Take the case of India , this western satellite TV had shown worldwide cruel scene of army firing on citizens in Bosnia as mentioning atrocities of Indian army in Kashmir .
Similarly , during terrorist occupation in Charar-e-Sharif , this western channels clearly reflected their bad intention by anti-India , false and partial reporting for many days .
They use to do activities of not showing Kashmir in the map of India .
There are many other such examples that can be pointed out .
This the reason that nowadays Al-zazira ` s TV transmission is getting popularity in developing countries , specially in Asian countries against these western channel by exposing their false propaganda - despite the fact that in a way Alzazira is considered related to Al-qaida .
Needless to say that today in this uni-polar world , even United Nation does not have importance rather than a insignificant department of foreign ministry of American administration .
Sometimes , the role of United Nation and its security council behaves as any subordinate department under American War Department ` Pentagan ` .
At the time of Iraq war , it had played almost same role .
Same attitude of so called most ` autonomous ` and ` objective ` American media exposed , when CNN emerged as a spokesperson of American propaganda all over the world .
It will be enough to memorise that during gulf war of 1990 , journalist of CNN Barnad Shawn , John Hallyman and Peter Arnest who were giving 24 hours live coverage of American bombarding from the hotel ` Al-rashid ` of Baghdad , even after whole city was converted into ruins but that hotel was not affected .
Midst of scenes of heavy devastation , no one has even seen a scratch on the plaster there .
By these all incident not only so called ` autonomy ` and ` objectivity ` of western media but their hidden political motives and bad-intention get exposed .
By keeping this complete incident and contemporary atmosphere in mind this can be easily guess that how much preparation a television journalist need in this time .
Importance of television will increase very much in the form of instant news .
This news would be real incidents , in which no selection and cut-paste would done .
Thus , Importance of these means will further increase about world affairs and in the context of forming peoples opinion .
This thing is much more necessary because institution of ` editor ` has collapse in the media similarly as dinosaur disappeared from the earth .
William writes that ` in the competition of conquering distance , information-system are continuously refraining from the aspect , which is traditionally belongs to them only .
Their are step forward in conquering the distance but stability in the context of time is continuously decreasing .
It means , balance of both time and space is continuously decreasing .
This can sound strange to anyone , but this is the reality that policy makers of India took long time in understanding importance of television .
Most of them didn ` t understand distinguish character of television in the form of an effective mode of mass communication .
Such was not in the context of the radio .
Nor it can be said that Indian politician didn ` t have understanding of mass communication .
National Planning Committee formed during freedom struggle in the leadership of Jawaharlal Nehru has understood unlimited importance of mass communication even in 1938 .
Sub-committee on media issue of planning committee had reflected a clear understanding on the role of media for development of backwards societies .
In this context , Jawaharlal Nehru was fully aware with the decisive role of the radio and its use in development .
He had accurately speculated the power of radio while his Soviet Union and Europe trip in 1936 .
After independence , he reflected an approach of professional communicator on this problem in his speech delivered in constituent assembly on 15 March , 1948 .
This was natural because Nehruji himself was a professional journalist .
As a first Prime Minister of India he gave special attention to the development of radio and it was very much utilised .
After addressing to the refuses from Pakistan on the radio , he said , ` this is a charismatic power !
I see power like divine charisma in it . .
These both leaders considered development of mass communication as a compulsory condition for democracy .
After independence several times Nehru went to the Europe and America , specially that time , when television was very popular there .
Even though it is very surprising that how he missed evaluation of real importance of television .
It seems , Jawaharlal Nehru and the people of his generation considered television as a very expansive and luxury equipment .
Perhaps they could not understand it ` s utilisation and its effective role in expansion of democracy properly .
Broadcasting of radio started in India soon after radio transmission started in world .
After independence , in the deep sea of darkness of illiteracy , Radio has emerged as a light-house of mass communication .
But even after emergence of television as a main mode of mass communication in Europe and America , it was not launched in India .
While answering the question that television is a means of luxury or not , Vikram Sarabhai replied in two words that it depends on the fact that who is using this medium and how he is usin .
He also said that radio can not be option of the television .
Television is more believable , multi-authentic and more appealing because of being visual and audio medium together .
Therefore , they clearly believed that in the context of social and economic backwardness of India , we should not only adopt powerful technology like television but its role should also me people-education oriented and development oriented , not purely entertainment oriented .
Sarabhai had realized this danger well in advance that if the same people will decide the development oriented role of television who uses it for entertainment , then in any situation television will be diverted from its aim in the context of mass-education and development .
Starting of television in India happened almost after three decades of its starting in the world - that too with hesitation and dilemma .
Then time golden age of television was going on in Europe and America .
At the same time , a international conference of UNESCO organised in New Delhi in 1956 .
Positive role of television in the progress of education , rural development and community widely discussed in this conference .
Till now television was not launched in India .
But almost one year ago , in 1955 , people had seen first time television in an international fair organised in Delhi .
That time , Philips company did broadcast by putting up a ` close-circuit ` television system there .
On the declaration of grant of 20,000 Dollar by UNESCO , Philips company proposed government of India to selling of trans-meters on cheap prices , which was accepted .
In this way , in these situation , television launched in India in a small studio on the fifth floor of Akashvani Bhavan .
President of India Dr . Rajendra Prasad ceremonially inaugurated television in India on 15 September 1959 .
The few TV sets were made available by the help of UNESCO , tele-clubs of audiences were formed for those .
Programs of twenty minutes two days per week used to shown to these members of tele-clubs , regular audiences .
These programs used to be mainly on the subjects such as health , cleaning , agriculture and family-planning .
Anyone can imagine that how boring and clumsy these programs would have been .
Television was a new genre and despite low level of these program and roughness of ` massage ` , it had quite succeed in in creating curiosity and attraction in audiences .
Soon , numbers of these tele-clubs increased to 180 .
Looking at this , government increased transmission period with increase of numbers of these community TV sets for tele clubs .
Now programs were transmitted for the period of half an hour increasing from 20 minutes on both days .
A trans-meter of 500 watt was placed for transmission of these programs in the radius of 20 Kilometer of Delhi .
It memorable that first live telecast by television in India was done of flag hosting on the Red Fort on the Independence day by Nehru Ji on 15 August 1960 .
On the behalf of UNESCO , television was used for running a program of social education in Delhi from 23 September 1960 to 5 May , 1961 .
Aim of this social education program of UNESCO was giving understanding of responsibility of citizenship and information of traffic rules to the people .
Along with this , aim of this program was mentioned as encouraging mass about health service and family planning and aware people against adulteration of food .
Television was just like a small screen cinema in its form .
Thus , some because of curiosity and intriguing towards new genre , some because of attraction of free cinema , initially audiences used to come in these tele club .
But because of absence of any attractive form and repetition of low level performances the audience also seemed to get bored very quickly .
After inclusion in the cabinet of Lalbahadur Shashtri as a Information and broadcasting minister , in 1964 , Indira Gandhi took special interest in development of the television .
Mrs Gandhi was perhaps first such Indian politician who took interest in the context of expansion , development and presentation of television , soon after she took charge of ministry .
Soon , in 1964 she constituted Chanda Committee for suggestions on improvement and necessary changes in television .
While reports of both these committees were awaited , Mrs Gandhi herself increased general broadcasting period four days from two days weekly in April 1965 .
After this , the same year transmission period extended to one hour from 15 August .
From 15 August 1965 , a large studio of Doordarshan started functioning in a big hall of All India Radio .
On becoming Prime Minister , Mrs Indira Gandhi inaugurated a new program namely ` Krishi-Darshan ` on 26 January 1967 .
This program was based on problems of the farmers , in which they were informed experts ` opinion on modern technology related to agriculture .
Till 1972 Doordarshan had enough improved its technical capacities as a result Mrs Gandhi ` s interest in the development of television and various steps taken by her .
Apart from this , Delhi television had increased its program-producing capacity much more in comparison to earlier .
Now telecasting of Doordarshan programs extended to thirty seven and half hour per week from Delhi center .
Both of these can be called important features of the first phase of the history of television , because the television which has only 41 community TV sets till 1962 and started with one channel , now has two centers - Delhi and Bombay .
Apart from this , onwards 1965 , viewership has been significantly increased after regularisation of daily telecast .
After this initial phase , second phase of the history of television can be called a phase of unprecedented development .
Now news transmission was started from both Delhi and Mumbai centers of Doordarshan .
The second phase of history of television can be called from 1973 to 1982 .
This phase can be called a phase of unprecedented development and huge expansion on country wide level of Doordarshan .
Ten main specialties can be told of this phase .
First and foremost specialties was that in this phase only , in 1967 , television separated from radio and from 1 April its autonomous existence established with the name ` Doordarshan ` .
Second important specialties can be called this that at the end of this phase television converted from black and white into color television .
Seventh specialty of this second phase was that Doordarshan has starting become filmy in this phase only .
By telecast of feature film and starting , apart from programs of film song like ` chitrahar ` many programs related to film - world and entertainment oriented programs , Doordarshan has stepped up in the direction of filmisation by changing its character .
Eighth specialty of this phase was that first time Doordarshan became commercial .
Several people consider that indeed TV revolution was started from 1982 in India .
Needless to say that if this is the ` television revolution ` of Doordarshan , sudden commercialisation of public broadcaster was one of the main reason of this .
Obviously , changes were bound to come in the complete character of Doordarshan by these .
In fact , this misdeed was started even well before of this .
The way was prepared for ` autonomy ` of public media in the government of Janata Party , this was bound to lead towards marketism and consumerism .
On this path role of Doordarshan was bound to be converted into commercial and marketist from development orient media .
It will not irrelevant to memorise this that later information and broadcast minister P . Upendra of one another such coalition front government had announced ` autonomy ` to radio and Doordarshan as he took up the charge .
But when he also said in the context of same ordinance that gradually Doordarshan should become self-dependent , his hidden agenda exposed .
Anyways , the self-killing policies started in Doordarshan from 1991-95 , this is the event to be happened very later in its history , which will be discussed on opportune place .
This is mentioned here to tell this that killing of developmental goals and seed of its own destruction were planted right here , result reflected some time later .
The ` Akash Bharati ` bil was tabled in parliament on 16 May , 1979 and could pass only in the end of 1990 as amended ` Prasar Bharati ` ordinance .
Transmission area of Doordarshan has extended due to formation of news centers and studio system , its technical capacity raised and program produced also raised .
SITE campaign was run for the population of most deprived 2400 villages from 1 August 1975 to July 1976 for one year .
For these a memorandum was done between government of India and space organization of America ` NASA ` .
Under this agreement programs were live transmitted directly on TV sets through ` ATS-6 ` satellites of America .
These all were community TV sets , Government of India had made available these sets for rural population of most backward 2,400 villages of 20 districts of six states .
These programs of SITE campaign were transmitted in four languages for four hours in morning and evening .
Hindi , Kannada , Odia and Telughu - each language of all these four used to given 22.5 minutes on every morning .
in the telecast section of one and half hour educational program were shown for school children of 5 to 12 years .
In the same language order , program of two and half hours used to be telecast for old-age people in the evening .
Along with this , national program of half hour also used to telecast from Delhi .
Later when ` SITE ` agreement expired and after one year America terminated its satellite service , Indian engineers and technology experts performed their admirable abilities .
Though scientist of ISRO organization had performed such notable abilities prior to this scheme .
America withdrew its satellite on 31 July 1976 and use of SITE terminated .
On the special direction of Mrs Gandhi decision was taken to continue this program .
This Indian satellite was made by ISRO with the help of an American company Ford Aerospace and Communication .
Two TV transponder developed by ISRO located in this .
This was launched in outer space from Cape Canaveral Kennedy Space Center by American space agency NASA on 10 April , 1982 .
After two months of launching this became able to use by Doordarshan .
But due to various technical mistakes Doordarshan ` s declared program with the help of it , could not be started before 15 August 1982 .
Apart from this this declared program was remained only of 10 minutes instead of 90 minutes .
After this , satellite had stop functioning in less than one year .
Taste of this expansive foreign ` help ` was proven very bad .
Apart from this , several other problem had also been raised because of failure of ` Inset-1-A ` .
An another important fact , as mentioned earlier , was starting of many centers in this phase .
Onwards 2 October 1972 second center of Doordarshan has been established in Mumbai .
Now 2 February 1973 onwards Pune center has also started .
In this age Calcutta and Madras center from 9 August 1975 and Lucknow center from 27 November , 1975 was also started .
There was a hand of anti-India campaign by Pakistan television in quickly setting up of Shrinagar and Amritsar respectively on 26 January 1973 and 29 September , 1973 .
Both of these centers were set up quickly in a political decision to counter this anti-India campaign .
Programs of the Pakistan television were used to watch in a large area of Punjab and Jammu-Kashmir in India .
To counter this campaign transmitted from Lahore and Islamabad centers of Pak TV , various programs used to be transmitted one hour per second day and from 3 noon to 5.30 pm on Sunday from Shrinagar center .
Same year these programs were transmitted for two hour from 8 July and four hours from 13 July .
Apart from this Government of India had also arranged 250 community TV sets in Kashmir valley .
It was also a notable fact that the first morning service of Doordarshan was also started from Shrinagar center only .
Similarly , during this second phase , on the one hand independent nature of Doordarshan becoming by separating from radio , on the other hand process of it ` s more filmisation has started .
From the starting of advertisement service first time in Doordarshan on 1 January , 1976 , the step it had taken gradually in the direction of commercialisation , now they began to be dynamic .
Third phase of the history of Doordarshan can be called from 1983 to 1992 .
Feature of this phase was that after failure of ` INSET-1 A ` -LRB- it had stopped work on 5 September 1982 -RRB- an another Indian satellite was launched on 30 August 1983 from Cap Canedy .
It has started working with complete success after its activation in 1983 .
Under the scheme of custom rebates -LRB- taking TV set on payment of only general duty -RRB- from 1 January 1983 to 31 March 1984 more than four lac color TV sets were imported .
Government itself had imported 90 thousands color ` kits ` from Western Germany and South Korea .
Apart from this , as a result of liberal policies of duty free under new import policy , with assembling television ` kit ` imported from outside manufacturing of TV sets picked up speed in the country .
With the growth in production in both public and private sectors prices began to drop .
After invention of the color television in 1982 total 6,63,300 TV sets were made including 60 thousands color TV sets .
Soon , after making of color picture tube , more boost came in this sector .
Doordarshan was so quickly developed in 1984 that almost one transmeter was established per day in this year .
Due to result of this speed of expansion in 1987 , 228 trans-meter of Doordarshan were successfully transmitting their programs to 60 to 65 percent people .
According to a guess , till 1989 , 500 trans-meter were established , through these Doordarshan had become able to broadcast its program to the 80 to 85 percent people .
As far as ` Akashvani ` is concerned , there was no necessity of satellite for radio .
It ` s own national program was already on air with the help of ` micro-wave-link ` .
Radio had its own ` micro-wave link ` and out of its 85 only 8 center were under satellite .
This critiques argued that even television broadcast was finely going on with ` micro-wave , then what is need of ` Inset ` .
Yes , of course it can be said that other channels of Doordarshan could be started by this .
Overall that time use of Inset limited to only 8000 live telecasting TVs for education related programs .
Doordarshan launched second local channel in Delhi on 17 September , 1984 .
As far as this second channel concerns , nature of ` Metro Channel ` was kept entertainment oriented .
Entertainment related understanding -LRB- or calling misunderstanding will be more correct -RRB- of Doordarshan is also remain under harsh criticism .
This also played main role in diverting Doordarshan from its main aims .
After this starting of ` sponsor ` programs on Doordarshan did remaining task .
This process later culminated in large scale corruption and flood of extremely substandard serials .
It may be called most sad chapter of the history of Doordarshan , which started in this third phase .
1894 onwards Doordarshan has not only put films , film songs and film base programs in the category of ` sponsored ` , but gates were also opened of all other programs under the category of ` sponsored ` .
No doubt , income of Doordarshan largely increased by this .
Income of Doordarshan , which was 77 lac rupees during 1976-77 in the first year of its becoming commercial , was increased to more than 40 crores in 1984-85 .
In the last year of this third means during 1993-94 Doordarshan had earned more than 450 Crore rupees .
These serials were born from western ` soap opera ` .
In west it was started by companies as advertisement to increase their products .
Because at first ` Soap and detergent companies had done experiments for advertisement , therefore these serial stories called ` soap opera ` , however they are for advertisement of any product .
At first these were also started in Radio broadcast .
Television took this idea of ` soap opera ` or ` serials ` from the radio .
Soon , these ` soap opera ` became very popular television program in Europe , America and other places also .
After blockbuster popularity of these serial and as a result heavy earning , ` mega serials ` such as ` Ramayan ` and ` Mahabharat ` has broken all record of popularity and earning .
Declare policy of Doordarshan was to not give more than ten percent time for advertisement .
` Ramayan ` used to get almost 45 advertisement on top of its polarity .
Earlier its 52 parts were approved , then 26 more parts were accepted .
In the year of 1986 , income of almost ten crores rupees occurred to Doordarshan within one year only by the serial ` Ramayan ` only , almost 30 crores rupees have been earned by advertisement by mega serial Mahabharat of 104 episodes .
Rahi Masoom Raza had written the script of ` Mahabharat ` .
After this all good-bad serials were queued up in Doordarshan .
Two very important serials came on Doordarshan .
Those were , ` Bharat : Ek Khoj ` by Shyam Benegal based on ` Discovery of India ` by Jawaharlal Nehru and Govind Nihlani ` s serial based on famous novel ` Tamas ` by famous writer Bhishm Sahani .
Sangh-Pariwar has done unsuccessful efforts in court to stop transmission of each and every episode of this very popular based on a humanitarian story in the background of tragedy of partition and sinister communal riots and artistically excellent serial .
It ` s popularity touches new high by this .
Apart from this , Doordarshan had also provided audiences to some good experimental and art films of Film Finance corporation and ` Damul ` , ` Paar ` , ` Ye Vo Manzil Nahin ` etc .
At a time , Doordarshan had encouraged theater by showing tele-form of performances of National School of Drama .
In this order play form of the stories of Tagore were also presented .
Fourth phase of the history of Doordarshan can called from 1993 to 2000 .
Though from 1991-92 itself with new economic policies of liberalism step towards privatisation had been taken and from Asiad -LRB- 1982 -RRB- onwards Doordashan started adopting more commercial approach keeping away its developmental concepts , but in this phase after 1993 it ran fast on the path of privatisation and commercialisation .
According to statistics prepared in August 1985 the 38 percent time of total broadcast time were given to the entertainment program , was increased to 42 percent in 1990 .
After Metro channel , from 1993 many hours are further increased in entertainment programs of Doordarshan .
While reviewing this situation Pachauri further stats that `` till 1990 Doordarshan used to telecast 120 films per year including Sunday feature film , regional language film , film on the last Saturday of the month -LRB- it could be any Indigenous or foreign -RRB- .
Apart from this , Doordarshan used to transmit almost 1100 film songs in a year in the video programs of films Chitrahar -LRB- Wednesday and Friday -RRB- and Chitramala -LRB- Monday -RRB- three times in a week .
In 1990 , even weekly two films were increased .
In this way telecast of weekly five films started .
The flood occurred of serials of filthy category in this phase , religious fundamentalism , superstitious , suspense and unscientific ideology served to audiences on the large scale on this pattern .
This all facts prove that till this phase Doordarshan had left its claimed aims finally .
On one hand filthy ` entertainment ` of cheap category , on the other hand Doordarshan went on the another end of false intellectualism and elitism while launching a new third channel .
Effect of diversion from its claimed aims was mostly reflected on its informative programs .
Mainly news and current affairs program included in this .
From the beginning structure of Doordarshan remains under bureaucracy based on babu-dom instead of professional people .
This is open secret that even after freedom , all executive work of the country is being run by a bureaucracy , which is perhaps the most worthless and corrupt bureaucracy carrying colonial legacy in its original nature .
Misfortune of the television in India was that first , it came very late and for a long time its real importance was not taken into account , second it was kept as a small department of ` All India Raido ` under radio .
Leave the issue of creative , intelligent and skill journalist , often there use to be lack of any kind of professional journalist in television .
Best professional , either din ` t reached there , kept themselves away or exceptionally some one trapped by coming here , ran away as they got chance .
In the pressure of circumvent harsh criticism of News and current affair programs of Doordarshan , efforts are being made time to time to reform these , specially the current affair programs .
According to the expectation good result have also surfaced of these .
` Focus ` , ` Samyiki ` , ` Aajkal ` , ` Sach ki Parchain ` , ` News line ` , Roving eye ` and ` Janvani ` etc . could be mentioned among such programs .
A most popular program ` Parikrama ` by Kamaleshwar can also be mentioned among these .
Apart from this programs such as ` Parakh ` , ` Hello Zindagi ` , ` Surabhi ` , ` Bat Ban Jay ` , ` Eye Witness ` , ` News Track ` and ` World This Week ` could be mentioned .
In 1995 Doordarshan had started news bulletin ` Aaj Tak ` and ` Tonight ` of ` NDTV ` of twenty minutes in the ` prime time ` in sponsored category .
Looking at their popularity , there time period had been extended to half an hour .
Later , this ` Aaj Tak ` news bulletin developed as a 24 hours private news channel ` Aaj Tak ` on 31 December 2000 .
Prior to this , Ashel group had started ` Zee TV ` from August , 1992 .
But , if we look at figures , Doordarshan has no lack of resources even today .
It will no exaggeration to say that all resources of private channels together can not compete these huge resources .
Annul Report -LRB- 2006-07 -RRB- of Information and broadcasting ministry of Government of India seems to prove these facts .
According to this report , `` today Doordarshan manages 25 channels , among them 5 national , 11 satellite channel of regional languages , 8 channels of the states and one international channel are included .
No one can object this goodwill of report and it ` s claim that `` DD-1 channel of Doordarshan is transmitted on largest territory of the world .
This time 91 percent population of the country can watch its telecast .
They can watch , but fact is that despite this they do not watch .
Is this question never bother political leadership of the country and black bureaucracy like white elephant .
Do not ! these boiling issue can never break that circle of their limited and narrow ` thinking ` .
Doordarshan is a tool of propaganda for politician and a open field of corruption for bureaucrats .
Current condition of Doordarshan is very pathetic .
These television institution of almost thousands workers and properties of billions is today becoming shadow of the past .
It has many times higher means and resources than any TV channel or company .
Huge Network is there and there is no lack of modern equipments .
But he can not do anything .
Employees and officers of Doordarshan are in despair and frustration .
They recall golden past and tears on present .
Attention of most remains on how money is made .
Indeed , today Doordarshan stands at a crossroad .
He is in this dilemma that where to g .
If listening to the market , it would have tried to become like private channel , duty of public broadcaster is ignored .
In real , Doordarshan itself is responsible for this condition .
Game of privatisation was started by it only .
It showed a desire to become a grossing .
All know that in India television was not started for the sack of earning .
It was started in a limited manner and on a large scale on 15 September 1959 .
It was started on experimental telecast basis of education and development of half an hour .
This was so because contemporary power institutions saw it as a tool of change .
Television was keeping commercial approach from right from the beginning .
Truth is that story of invention of the television was related to wishes of profit making of industries .
Several industrial families were engaged in search of possibility of commercial use of television .
One of the inventors of television Farnsworth was used to asked by his financer that when will television give landslide profit .
The television rating we are debating today , that was started five-six decades earlier in western countries .
The bad impact of TRP -LRB- television rating point -RRB- we are witnessing today happening in India , these has occurred there earlier .
Those who are running the government was observing that how television is damaging society in the west .
It was serving violence , sex and sensation there .
Worst commercialism was stuffed in the programs .
This commercialism using each and every kind of tools to made promo of the program salable .
It had changed society also .
It had become more individualistic and consumerist .
Personal interest were completely dominated on this and social concern were not in its agenda .
If we look at initial development of Doordarshan , it gets clearly obvious .
Most of the program used to be related to the education and information .
Because most of the population of the country affiliated to the farming , thus it ` s news were given priority .
Emphasise used to be on new methods of farming , new seeds and tools .
It is not that government if forcefully imposing this agenda upon it .
Intellectual class of the time was also champion of this policy .
Famous space scientist and thinker Dr . Vikram Sarabhai had said in his article titled ` television ` for development -LRB- 1969 -RRB- that primary phase of development in any developing country is dissemination of information .
No doubt , because of demerit of programs or because of wrong direction of those , expect result could not be met .
But despite various kinds of limitations , aim of the Doordarshan was clear .
It had to work for development , not business or trade .
The most important report among these is by Dr . P.C. Joshi titled ` An Indian Personality for Indian Television ` .
It is said in this report that Doordarshan should not show bad entertainment and foreign life style and advertisement of things of luxury on the name of development .
Along with , it should work becoming people centrist and spoke-person of rural society while keeping development in mind .
Till the decade of seventy Doordarshan used to walk on this developing line .
But with the telecast of ` Asiad ` and colourisation of television in 1982 many more started to change .
This was the time , when magic of Doordarshan was taking the country in its grip .
On the other hand , in this process it kept on adopting economic philosophy of the government .
Thus infiltration of this ideology began to happened in Doordarshan .
Such officers are began to appointed there , who are open supporter of privatisation .
Thus such concept started taking place in Doordarshan that association with private companies will increase quality of programs and also income of Doordarshan .
This wave was becoming louder .
Then no one has kept courage to stand-up against it .
Series of sponsored programs on the television began in July 1984 .
First sponsor program was serial ` Ham Log ` .
Success of ` Ham Log ` suddenly increased trend of corruption in Doordarshan .
It feels that this is the best way of income .
Till now Doordarshan was only expanding , so when it shown earning , he also made be praise .
That time meaning of getting programs of Doordarshan was : getting lottery .
Because of alone and popular channel advertisers used to be ready with money .
Thus , it had no hesitation in giving a small portion from that to private producer .
Thus many such producers used to roam around Mandi House , who get program by bribing officers and then make money .
Skilled producers used to be out from Mandi House because they hadn ` t capacity to sell their programs .
Policy of Mandi House started being this that on the basis of ` poilet ` of the program we will give permission of the producing but you yourself have to find the sponsors .
Doordarsham will not commission that .
Now this is a fact of out of the hand of most of the good producers because they dont know tips of marketing , however these were according to the businessmen .
The second problem arose that good producer were not agree to do compromise with the quality of the programs .
The wanted to work only on their condition .
Contrary to this , commercial private producer had nothing like value .
Thus , good producers became victims of privatisation .
They started collapsing before market .
Officers of Doordarshan kept on watching this .
Even they didn ` t remember that why and how Doordarshan was launched in India .
They were no longer taking care of people of the country .
Approximately this was the time , when government of India was dissociating itself from the concept of welfare state .
It economic policies were moving on the way of privatisation .
Work was started on instructions of World Bank and International Monetary Fund .
This concept was taking place in the government that investment in any this kind of work in the name of social development is wastage of money .
Pressure of private company on it was also working .
Bu it nowhere happened in the world that television takes responsibility of social concerns and development and become independent by making profit .
In the words of poet Dhumil , this was never possible that one can raise hand and cover arm .
If you want to make money in the market , have to accept its conditions .
Second important thing in this context was that main stream of television was working exact contrary to this .
Private companies were using all tips for success and Doordarshan , which was working on the agenda of increase profit , had closed it ` s eyes .
Result was this that day by day it ` s programs began to fall on the track , it will be more appropriate to call them anti-development .
Flood of such programs based on myths and Puranas emerged which used to serve superstitious and unscientific ideas .
If emergence of communalism in the decade of 90s is linked with these programs of Doordarshan , this is not completely wrong .
On the other hand cheap films were began to show in the name of entertainment .
Several programs based on film songs and parts were began to show .
Sociology of this advertisement was different and these used to work on an another kind of economic psychology .
If any advertisement used to say that this TV will be cause of pride for you and jealous for neighboures , definitely it used to encourage consumerism , and in wrong way .
On the one hand , these advertisement used to create hunger of luxury in the rich class and on the other hand spread frustration and despair in the poor .
Presentation of women as a object of consumption was very common trend in these .
Hence Doordarshan wanted profit , so it had to compel for giving liberties to private produces as per the demands of market .
Now Doordarshan want to be stand on the spur of ` DD News ` in the world of television news .
Though , when it was started on 3 November 2003 , aim was different .
Aim was delivering benefits to ruling party in elections .
Appointments on higher posts were made by taking this thing in the mind .
They were relieved on the falling of government .
But the same pattern of political appointments is continue in the new regime .
Anyways , this news channel is not able to make its place in the world of news .
Irony is that even private producer , Doordarshan had created , were not remain loyal to it .
As they earn popularity , experience and money , they began to search their own way .
Supporters of marketism can say that Doordarshan had a historical role , he delivered this .
It had provided a base and a market to flourish television industry .
After this , now it was not needed anymore .
Its usefulness was over , because the time had come of market .
But the reality is that Doordarshan has not earn anything , but lost everything by keeping the path of privaisation ! Its credibility was destroy .
It ` s development was blocked because of in-dependence .
It didn ` t justice with it ` s role as a public broadcaster .
He went out of his objectives , strayed from the goals .
Even , now it was nowhere stands in the market of channels .
Formation of ` Prasar Bharati ` created hopes that it will bring back Doordarshan on the track .
But till now he itself not able to come on the track .
The autonomy and social duty referred during making of ` Prasar Bharati ` , is no where .
Even till now government order works there .
People are appointed and removed on the order of government .
The aims with it was started , it has abandoned them .
This is not like that no protest was done against it .
On the level of policy maker and on the level of Doordarshan itself such efforts were made , but were proved ineffective .
Three main reasons appear of this .
First , such efforts were only at theoretical level .
By the time they are not put into practice , they could not be effective .
Actually , television was victim of many kind of dilemmas from its starting itself .
The first dilemma was this that television should be launched or not in India .
Usually , it used to be consider as a expansive thing of luxury .
If television is used wisely , this the only way despite being expansive .
But the intentions of dunce and expansive bureaucracy were always different .
It is clearly mentioned in the report , in the special reference of India , that primary goal of Indian television is development through mass-education , information and knowledge .
Its goal is to uplift life-level of common people of the country .
But despite adopting development oriented concept an another dilemma was there in the context of future development of television in India .
First was Chanda committee among these , which submitted its report almost after two years in 1966 .
By the time television was facing double trouble of government negligence and its own contradictions .
Chanda committee has focused on current structure of television and problem of its development while reviewing these all circumstances .
But irony was this that despite many good suggestions some such contradictory things were also said in this report , which undermine importance of this report .
In this context Chanda committee had suggested their autonomous development by constituting them as separate corporation of radio and television .
When report of the committee submitted , Smt Gandhi had become Prime Minister .
From 1 April , 1976 television became an ` autonomous ` department of Information and Broadcasting Ministry with the name ` Doordarshan ` by separating from radio -LRB- All India Radio-AIR -RRB- .
Because of erstwhile part of Radio impact of active bureaucracy was there in the television , which was increased from 1972 .
During emergency this screws of bureaucracy was tighten more on it .
This was not reduced even after becoming autonomous department of it separating from Radio .
Chanda committee had done nothing in this regard .
Looking at delay in the recommendations of Chanda committee , in the over-enthusiasm Indira Gandhi constituted a new committee in 1965 with existence of erstwhile .
This committee was formed in the chairperson-ship of Dr . S. Bhagavantam .
Anyways , Bhagavant Das committee was proven even useless and worst .
It ` s recommendations were more contradictory and of avert kinds .
Any suggestion-understanding of special character of television and its role did not reflects from its report .
Indeed , he did not make effort to think in this direction .
In the excitement of ` liberation ` from the government committee even did not think on pressures of market and market control .
As a result of its contradictions falling of Janata Party government before its tenure and return of Indira Gandhi mater of ` Akash Bharati ` went into cold storage for long period .
He had to wait for a period of almost one decade and United Front government for it ` s rebirth .
But this matter falls into hurdle after advent of Janata Party government in 1977 .
Materilisation of suggestion by the committee of color transmission could be only in 1980 after return of Mrs Gandhi .
Instead of depending on other , now we should develop our own information technology .
We have to choose any one of transformation of foreign technology and creation of our own new technology .
More we become imitator , equally we will be far from our national aim and social goals .
We will make some isolated island of prosperity by using modern technology in this vast and poor country .
But if we will try to become more self-dependence and creative , we will be more close to our national goal .
We can also use our technical backwardness for our benefit .
This indeed , directly converts several small farmers as heroes of social development .
In such condition informer can contribute the biggest that they bring sponsors , administrators and real hero of development close to each other .
Thus , they can bring innumerable labourer and several small producers close to their .
This is necessary to understand well that appropriate knowledge of seed , fertilizer , crop , load and price is basic information for development .
Needless to say that Joshi Committee had strongly criticised the gradual sidelining of Doordarshan by its basic responsibilities .
In the words of P . C . Joshi , `` for getting introduction of any country , it ` s television should be watched .
Television of any country is the mirror of character of the nation .
These thought of Joshi committee are like reflection of such comment of Dr . Vikram Sarabhai made long ago .
Doordarshan should show children with there all complex problems and hope-dis-hope , along with future of India .
obviously , for this Doordarshan will have to adopt authentic and realistic approach .
Report calls this a creative challenge .
This is a contradictory situation .
The last aim of television is its educational use .
Rural children need it more in comparison to urban children but it never addresses them .
P.C. Joshi committee has done most harsh criticism in the context of ` form ` and ` content ` of news of Doordarshan and ` current affairs ` programs .
Mentioning news department of Doordarshan as a ravenous man committee has commented that to prove uselessness of Doordarshan only one question is enough that what does its news and current affairs programs show about people who live life below poverty line .
And also , are they for t m ?
Committee has expressed perplexity that condition of newspaper run by private sector is better than Doordarshan the broadcaster of public sector , run by the money of public .
Thus , really the most and harsh criticism of Doordarshan is occurs of its information system .
New , current affair and other informative programs are included in this .
It was apply on Doordarshan also , because that time it was a part of the Radio .
Amendment was made in this code of conduct in 1970 .
But their form was negative , not subjected to improve information system .
This code was a open challenge to fundamental right of the citizens to freedom of expression provided by the constitution .
Right to implement it was given to director of the center .
He was given right to stall or decline the transmission .
Then Chief Minister and Speaker of Assembly was given permission to clear cloud and place their opinion .
First time directive-guideline was implemented for Doordarshan on 22 July 1980 .
After this committee had given detail instruction in this matter to news policy related media .
The biggest limitation of Vardan Committee was that that it couldn ` t understand basic point of the problem .
Neither Doordarshan has any strategy nor sleeping government prepared any ` satellite policy ` .
When Doordarshan was legging behind badly , ridiculous efforts were made of constituting customary committees and repairing by their impractical and irrelevant reports .
Nothing was likely to be happened , therefore nothing had happened .
Senior journalist Nikhil Chakravarty , famous theater person Habib Tanvir and journalist-story writer Mrinal Pandey etc . were included in this committee .
But unfortunately , this committee also presented strategy of machine against machine , didn ` t provide any solid suggestion related to the material .
Despite this , recommendation of Dhevdhar committee ` s importance is that it ruined babu-dom completely .
In its recommendations , by making bureaucracy of Ministry of Information and Broadcast and Doordarshan right-less it has terminated role of it ` s mediating .
By this step , roots were eradicated of corrupt bureaucracy and open competition get encouragement .
By manipulating politician worried bureaucracy suddenly announced ` Metro ` channel on 26 January 1993 before recommendations of Devdhar committee whithout taking committee into confidence by its manipulation .
Devdhar committee resigned in protest of this .
Starting of last decade of twentieth century is the decisive turn in the history of our country .
In 1990-91 two big events happened in India .
Big in the sense that result of both were proven long lasting and effective .
Both of these events together created massive upheaval in our political-economic structure and social life .
Not only created upheaval , but decided both direction and condition of future life of society and person .
Anyways , at first these great events .
First was , new economic policy initiated by Narsimha Rao government and his finance minister Man Mohan Singh .
However , nothing was ` new ` in this new economic policy .
Substantially bankruptcy occurred of some of our Asian countries and Latin American countries by adopting it .
The second great event was starting of satellite TV through ` Dish ` and ` Cable ` .
Intrusion of these micro waves through happened so silently and sudden that sleeping government had no idea of it .
These invisible streams of satellite TV do not consider any geographical boundaries of boundaries of the Nations .
No any international law can bind them .
They don ` t gave acceptance of constitution and national-law of any country .
They are symbol of power of powerful American multi-national companies .
They are aggressive symbol of information-imperialism .
According to a research study , there are 22 such multi-national corporations of worlds , who control world wide information networks and flow of information .
Among this multinational corporation 18 are American ` corporation ` only .
Their network is spread all over the world .
Among these , budget of each and every one is so huge that it use to be bigger than budget of several small countries .
American giant multinational company Ted Turner Turner Corporation also has a television company ` CNN ` -LRB- Cable News Network -RRB- .
These three are on the top among the all big American TV companies .
On the starting of Gulf War in 1990 CNN had also started its world wide twenty four hours live telecast .
Now they were getting such option of entertainment , which either Doordarshan could not provide or which could provide , it was unable to give due to its bureaucratic structure .
Telecast of CNN were continue even after over of it .
Gulf-War had done fundamental changes in the world of television and field of information .
Now flooding was started of satellite TV companies .
Soon , following CNN , BBC , Star TV and Asia Set also jumped in this competition .
As we have already mentioned that during this development the government kept on sleeping while putting oil in the ears and closing eyes .
When government woke up , then it decided to teach a lesson to celebrator destroyers of Doordarshan , the cable operators .
In 1991 , Madras High Court gave its judgement that cable TV can not be stopped .
Government do not have such right .
On the other hand Supreme Court in a famous judgement announced that `` no one has monopoly over aerial waves .
On the other side , Subhash Chandra of Eshel Group launched ` Zee TV ` on 15 August 1992 .
Ruport Murdoc of British muti-national company ` Sky News ` had done an agreement of partnership with ` Zee TV ` in December 1993 after buying ` Star ` .
Both together started 24 hours news channel ` E-L TV ` in December , 1994 .
After starting of the facility of up-linking from India , at first Zee Network started Hindi news bulletin of half an hour in 1992 .
Soon , this bulletin started attracting audiences .
This news bulletin attracts common middle class families of vast Hindi belt by its different style and presentation who were bored with dry news of Doordarshan and angry with these .
` Aapki Adalat ` of Rajat Sharma telecasted on ` Zee ` was also liked in these classes .
Jain television was launched on 1 January 1994 , which is first 24 hours news channel of India .
But on 1 February 1999 ` Zee Tele Film ` launched 24 hours news channel .
Technology of transmitting program and financial responsibility will also be of Star networks .
Copyright on editorial material will be of NDTV .
NDTV has established a new record by doing first time outstanding live coverage of huge process of general election on such a large scale .
After sometime of ` Star News ` , in 1999 ` Zee Network ` had started its own 24 hours news channel named ` Zee News ` .
Following ` Star News ` and ` Zee News ` the third private channel launched of 24 hours news , was ` Aaj Tak ` .
It was launched by television company ` TV Today ` network of Arun Puri ` s ` India Today ` Group on 31 December 2000 .
Lead and popularity of ` Aaj Tak ` reached on the top with launching itself .
First bulletin of ` Aaj Tak ` presented by famous Hindi journalist Surendra Pratap Singh had come on 17 July 1995 , 9.30 pm .
Erstwhile it had appeared to audiences as a Hindi News bulletin of only 20 minutes on the ` prime time ` of Doordarshan .
Looking at its popularity it time was increased to half hour .
` Aaj Tak ` got lead in coverage of earth-quack of Bhuj at the time of launching .
After this , ` Aaj Tak ` gave its exclusive story on the scenes of terrorist camps of Pak-occupied Kashmir and conversation with terrorist .
Its popularity increased by this also .
After live coverage of dangerous terrorist attack on parliament , the situation come that , apart from few exception AAJ TAK continuously remained on prestigious top post of new channel .
Converting a news bulletin of half hour into a news channel of 24 hours was not a small and easy task .
This is true that face of television use to be its ` anchor ` and identity of any news channels becomes from its ` anchor ` and reporters only .
But this is also true that behind making of this face and this identity there is mind of channel ` s editor and his original imagination .
Glamour was there in television from its starting , now it was started bending towards cheapness and levity in glamour by losing its remaining dignity .
IBN had first launched its ` business channel ` named ` Awaz ` .
Later it bought ` Channel Seven ` launched by Dainik Jagaran newspaper group .
` Channel Seven ` started as an another 24 hours news channel was not able to success even after great efforts .
But it is also correct that now this is also only a ` medium ` kind of image , means something mixed like ` NDTV ` .
But its meaning should not be taken as this is a imitation of both of these .
But this process is still going on .
This is the reason that even keeping middle path between both of these ends it looks like searching a completely new and different path .
Underlining difference of ` IBN-7 ` with other channel Rajdeep says that We have shown and are showing specially issues related to the common people .
Problems related to hunger and water , which are perhaps not ` salable ` today in channel , we show .
He expresses sorry that news on the issues like health , education and environment are shown equal to nothing .
Not only India , but these three issue are important for news for all around the world .
This issues are deeply related with each and every person and our politics is also deeply related to these .
Really sometime feeling of shame arrives looking at bad condition of news channels and the fall of content , is also shameful and worrisome .
And , a large part of the Tam Ratting comes only from two metros Mumbai and Delhi .
In such situation if news channels more concentrate on the concern of metro audiences , what is wrong in th ?
If parameter of success-failure of the news channels is the number of audiences , obviously they will try to meet the target .
No doubt in this that after leaving of Pranav Roy , a fall is recorded in the level and popularity of ` Star News ` .
As Uday Shankar became CEO of ` Star News ` , once again ` Star ` gained erstwhile popularity .
But contrary to the national channel , in the leadership of Prabhat Dabral regional channel achieved new parameter of level and popularity .
After few year a decline occurred in standard and popularity of both of these channels .
Today situation is that , for the sack of mention Sahara has Bihar-Jharkhand channel with these , but now prestige of neither both old channels nor of going to begin channel could persist .
Meanwhile , Rajat Sharma ` s channel ` India TV ` launched explosively .
Leave leading and prestigious channels , ` India TV ` seems far behind in comparison of ` Zee News ` .
Now the situation is that many such small-big channels are ready to take place on national , regional and local levels .
Few are launched , others will be launched soon .
Now , no wonder , if Hindi audiences will be visible .
It will be very hard to stand in front of these prestigious and popular news for any going to launch Hindi channel .
Right now , the whole scene is emerging something like this .
Before conclusion of this chapter , it is necessary to take note of one thing .
Negative effect of this trend is also occurred on the news channels .
If society is now sick , than it wants to make it more sick and feeding it sweets and feeding it pickle .
Reason of this is that now open game is going on .
Even though , perhaps condition is not so disappointing .
We should keep hope even now .
In this context , TV journalist Dibang said a significant thing .
Fact is absolutely correct .
Even though , we can not be dependent by believing only on a ` variety seeking nature ` .
Cold-war had divided world in two groups .
After second world war America had formed its military bloc through military treaties namely CENTO , SEATO and NATO .
All those European powers including Britain were including in this , who had made slave countries of Asia and Africa earlier .
Some other Asian countries were also including in these , who were independent but had entered in the group of western countries .
After most of the countries are freed , some were still colonies of western imperialist powers .
These newly free countries had adapted policy of non-alignment due to wish of independent development in the leadership of Nehru-Nasir-Tito .
Most of the countries included in non-align movement were recently became free from the dependence of western imperialist countries .
Till now , they were trying to become free from indirect economic exploitation and political and cultural pressures of those .
These non-align countries of third world were catogarised in very backward , undeveloped , less-developed and developing countries .
Non-align movement , started with the principles of equal distance from two competitive groups and their military treaties gradually converted into anti-imperialist movement with its own experiences .
One such new global economic system based on equality , in which pan of profit do not only til in favor of the Western developed countries .
New agencies of non-align countries and their media was till now dependent on western agencies such as AP -LRB- Associate Press of America -RRB- , UPI -LRB- United Press International -RRB- , Reuters -LRB- British News Agency -RRB- and french AFP .
Similarly , they broadcast western imperialist politics , economy , social structure , culture and life style also in a changed image in these country .
Western media succeeds in its these intentions to a large extend .
But a large part of various developing countries of third word and its intellectuals used to resist this ideological and cultural attacks despite lack and weakness of its own information and communication system .
End of the day , precisely , this is the information imperialism , and this is the story of its resistance .
But if we want to understand this point in its totality and complexity , we have to go in its deepness .
But these scholars are strong critic of western consumerist , squat and sexy abnormalities .
As far as the question of Indian thinkers concerns in this field , the names of Dr Vikram Sarabhai , Prof Yashpal , Prof Puran Chand Joshi and Prof Shyamacharan Dubey are specially mentionable .
Accusation of confidential relation with this ` east-west center ` were also posed .
This accusation were posed by American press itself .
Denial Lurner of ` East-West Centre ` has presented controversial theories through his research regarding interaction of media and development .
According to his opinion , progress in the field of literacy happens only after at least 10 percent urbanisation in any country .
The sentence ` the media is the massage ` by famous American media experts Marshal Macluhan has became and much quoted fashionable formula and almost world famous idiom .
Macluhan considers it a absolute nonsense and absolute ignorance about ` special nature ` of the media .
They divide various media mentioning them so called ` Garm Madhyam ` and ` Thanda Madhyam ` .
For example , according to him in comparison of ` Garm Madhyam ` of films television is a ` Thanda Madhyam ` .
Similarly , they called radio a ` Garm Madhyam ` in comparison with TV .
Along with , television has outdated ` night clubs ` and reinstated theater which became irrelevant due to films .
While mentioning media as ` extension of human senses ` Marshal Macluhan calls it an important cognitive concept .
In this context Macluhan has done analysis of relations of various art-forms and various mediums .
The big problem of these all western media theory is that they completely ignore direct or indirect role of the ideology of dominating class in current capitalist-consumerist societies .
Vilber Shrem and all other western media experts are strongly against the public broadcaster form of all media including television .
He strongly advocates private ownership of the media .
It is obvious that behind these all theories vested interest of American and western capital and political interest are active .
McBride Commission constituted by UNESCO for study in the context of media has strongly criticised these multi-national media corporations in its report titled ` Many voices , one world ` .
Chairperson of the commission Sean McBride expressed deep worry over specially on ideological and cultural attacks by these western demon like media companies in developing countries of the third world .
Similarly , in a study at UNESCO Hammarskjöld Foundation clearly warned in its conclusion that increasing monopoly of multi-national corporations in current information-system is dangerous and this is a most worried problem for right to information for common people .
While presiding over conference of Non-align countries president of the movement Mrs Indira Gandhi in 1983 also expressed worried on this thing that increasing dependency of media of developing countries on foreign media is a dangerous sign .
Policy of America and its western associates countries in the field of information and communication is of double attack on developing countries .
They do not hide their intentions also .
A large number of jobs and business are on stack .
Now information industry is on number two in total export of America .
In 1980 this industry has done business of 75 billion dollars .
It is obvious by this that how deep and big stake are in developing countries of America and other developing countries .
Needless to say that ` UNESCO ` has also become a stage of this struggle in the field of information technology .
But this situation could not remain continue to a large extend .
Soon non-align countries not only started strong protest against American policies of information imperialism from the stage of UNESCO , but also passed several important resolutions against them with high majority despite anger of America and western countries .
Developing countries started successfully use of this forum by its numbers , then irritation of developed western countries was natural .
America was the only country voted against the proposal , however some of its European associates did not take part in the voting .
The resolution passed by world institution was a tight slap on the American policies of information imperialism in the cover of ` free flow of information ` .
By showing Kashmir separated from India or showing as controversial territory , they show false maps .
This manifesto was first step in the direction eradicate inequality in ` information-dissemination ` , which was culminated later in Mcbride report .
All undeveloped , semi-developed and developing countries of third world overwhelmingly welcomed manifesto .
But America and all his other associates having ` information-domination ` opposed it strongly .
Not only this , these countries and their powerful media strongly condemned it while doing worldwide vicious propaganda .
While spreading various kind of illusion in this regard America unsuccessfully tried to divide non-align countries .
American troops included in movement as members were also openly used for this .
America and its information dominant associates developed countries had strongly objected this decision .
Not only in the context of information and news , but this dependency is increased for the entertainment and various cultural programs .
This subordination gradually converts into ideological and cultural subordination .
But America and other western countries have expressed their strong reaction on this .
Therefore , information imperialism emphasises on ` free flow of information ` without any barrier .
Reach and ruling classes of various countries of third world often appear to be helpful in achieving these aims of its .
We should keep on achieve best and artistic achievements from our these cultural forms in a free atmosphere .
This is the only way to keep cultural identity live in any country .
Through this , they can put foundation of a new world information system while confronting information imperialism .
Non-align countries had felt that usually image of developing countries use to be doctored and false in the content of information produced by developing countries .
Keeping this aim in the mind ` Media foundation of non-align country ` was founded with help of ` UNESCO ` and in the leadership of India .
In this order only in 1985 NAMEDIA -LRB- means media of non-align country -RRB- was founded in the leadership o India .
This anti-imperialist unity among them used to strongly defeat western group of developed countries in the leadership of America in United Nationa and all of its organization including UNESCO .
This unity was foremost positive element in resistance information imperialism and raising demand of a new world information system based on equality .
Precise discussion regarding ` Prasar Bharati ` is already done in the context of ` Vargese Committee ` .
Similarly , relevant mention is done of problem of autonomy .
But detail discussion will be done in the context of both of these here .
After making of Prasar Bharati law , ` Prasar Bharati -LRB- Indian Broadcast Corporation -RRB- is come in to half existence .
But even though problem of autonomy is still there .
Even till now , discussions on autonomy of broadcast corporation and government pressure is not stopped .
Instead of this they talk about self-regulation .
The demand of freeing public broadcast system from government and giving complete autonomy raised its strong voice from the starting of decades of seventy itself .
Incidents of misuse of Doordarshan and All India Radio had reached on its extreme during Railway strike -LRB- 1974 -RRB- and in 1975-76 during emergency .
In this way , by freeing this public broadcast system form government control it should have fulfilled its promise by passing a law of making a ` autonomous body ` of their .
But government of Janta Party and its information and broadcast minister Lal Krishna Advani did nothing like this .
Mr. Minister forget it after approval and ministry threw it in cold storage .
When tabling of ordinance of ` autonomous ` in parliament was being diverted , than government and ministry has to face harsh criticism .
Bad intention of Janata Party government of not taking risk of providing autonomy to media had exposed .
But before its implementation this government crutch with Bharatiya Janata Party -LRB- BJP - which new avatar of Jansangh after dissolution of Janata Party -RRB- fallen after removal of crutch .
Those who cry much more for savior of anything , itself has strong feeling of murdering them .
Anyways , the government fell down , but Prasar Bharati bill passed .
Responsibility of it ` s implementation now came on the next government of Narsimha Rao .
But through out the tenure of this government neither such amendment occurred in this law nor this law implemented .
At last , the Rao government fell down in 1995 , but Prasar Bharat law was not implemented .
Anyways , in its current form it was remained a thing of past before new challenges of satellite TV and cable network .
Need was this that government should have seen the issue of autonomy with the consumerist pressures of marketist privatisation .
Next upcoming BJP lead government of National Democratic Alliance made for fun of it .
Anyways , at first it will be relevant to know very briefly ` Akash Bharati ` report and main facts of the passed ` Prasar Bharati ` law .
Responsibility of all legal provisions will be of central government and it will work on national level under that .
Bodies who take immediate decision and all other necessary step should be taken for this .
Doordarshan and All India Radio are mass media and they should work in the interest of people according to common national policy and national broadcast policy .
On the contrary , it suggests again merger of Doordarshan and All India Radio instead of different autonomous organization .
First of these , there is right on asking any information by government , on not providing that central government can dissolve the autonomous body by simple majority in the parliament .
Second mater is providing right of vigilance to the Parliamentary committee .
It is said in the law that the central government can issue appropriate direction in the interest of sovereignty , unity and integrity of India .
Work of this council will be making recommendations after inquiry of complains .
On the consideration of necessity this council can force autonomous body to telecast its recommendations .
Inefficacy of this semi-legal capacity is remain only ridiculous in the absence of right of giving mandatory punishment orders .
Similarly , in America Federal Communication Commission has right of implementation of its decision .
Joshi Committee had also gave suggestion of appointment of a ombudsman in its recommendations .
Apart from this under the Prasar Bharati law there is lack of approval of democratic rights of workers of autonomous body .
Without internal democracy there will no meaning of this autonomy .
Without relation with democratic value autonomy will be incomplete and flimsy .
Similarly , real aim of autonomy fulfills only , when producers of the program has complete professional freedom .
Law does not arrange anything for it also .
After looking at the structure of full time these members of the board , this thing automatically get clear .
Gill Sahib fought case in the court , but nothing happened .
Even if it has unlimited resources , modern equipments and technical capacity of reaching at larger communities of audiences .
If there is a lack , that is just one and that is lack of internal democracy in the structure of Doordarshan .
Needless to say that this is a fact of radical change in the whole structure of Doordarshan .
Obviously , this can not be happened .
For example , if we take example of Britain or America , generally media has complete autonomy there .
Journalists of BBC have complete professional freedom for work .
But it does not mean that till the time any people oriented change in system don ` t take place , autonomy can not found .
But looking at current structure of Prasar Bharati , this seems a thing of far .
Real storm came from this ` Tehlka ` sting of Tarun Tejpal , Aniruddha Bahal and Samual Maithyu on 13 March 2001 .
Before this , this team has already done ` sting operation ` on ` match fixing ` in cricket .
Many senior army officers were also trapped in this ` sting ` .
Even Bahal was victimised implicating in false cases .
Facts of teach lesson and threaten to journalists were also emerged .
This all arguments themselves seems so weak and ridiculous that this does not need any comment .
This new investigative journalism -LRB- sting -RRB- has totally changed a stream of journalism .
Illness of spicy news and ` sex scandal ` started spreading like an epidemic .
Dramatisation of rape scenes began to show in crime shows .
Once again , demand of new harsh press laws have been raised from many sectors .
This ` code ` is a part of this new ` Prasaran Niyaman Vidheyak ` only .
Apart from this , a three level institutional process is also proposed in this ordinance for address complains by audiences .
They are recommending various kind amendment in these and registering their objection on various issues .
With more clearness these are included in new way and with detail in many matters .
Apart from other facts in new facts have provision of three level system according to the content of time of transmission of the programs and hearing of complains .
The issue of controversy and protest are mainly three .
Corrupt politicians and bureaucrats get protective shield of defense by this .
These both Hindi and English programs are very popular all over the country .
Similarly , very popular program by Shekhar Suman ` Pol-Khol ` which is shown on ` Star News ` is also very popular .
Such kind of incidents use to happened earlier also due to absence of such law .
Balraj Manra used to respond questions of Vohra with wearing a mask sarcastically and humorously in this .
This program was an primitive ancestor of mix form of both ` Gustakhi Maf ` of ` NDTV : India ` and Shekhar Suman ` s ` Pol-Khol ` of ` Star News ` .
Power-establishment has nothing risk form this , instead has benefits .
These work as a safety valve for pacifying peoples ` anger , thus boiler of the power does not blast from fire of peoples ` anger .
It means whenever matter will come , decision will be taken according to the matter .
It could not be shown even in this form , where in method of crime by criminal is presented as admissible .
Similarly ban is proposed on ` horror show ` , all programs which encourage things like mystery , superstitions and magic .
This is obvious that no one can object this .
Sex , obscenity and nudity are first time analyzed in detail in this ` code ` .
Full nudity , kiss and sex related activities are banned .
Semi nudity can be shown at the time of ` adult ` television time in the necessary and special situations .
During this period ban is also imposed on double meaning dialogue and abusive and ugly language .
During this period scenes of consume of drugs and smoking can not be shown .
Ban has been imposed on interfere in private life of any man-woman and defame them in new code .
Similarly ban is imposed on doing or showing abuse to any religion .
All above mentioned facts of this new code is included in proposed Broadcast Regulation Law .
First time provision of founding of a three tier forum in the context of audiences ` s complains is done in this proposed law .
Audience can lodge a complaint against any transmission , on which necessary action will be taken .
Each and every broadcaster service provider will have to establish it .
Consumer Complaint Committee will be on the second level .
It ` s founding will be on telecast level .
Various associations of the industry together will form this .
After this a government appointed autonomous regulator will be there .
In this way , this is a three level hearing and process of investigation is proposed .
They consider that this section of the law should not become a barrier in the way of such pro-people sting operations .
Provision of similar harsh action is proposed in the context nudity and showing women in bad condition .
Obscenity is explained in detail in this .
According to this ban had been imposed on transmission of both television for short period of time .
In this way , A suggestion is given for such internal arrangement in new ` code ` for investigation of customers complains after registering them .
Whereby each private channel shall appoint ` Jana - Punch ` -LRB- Ombudsman -RRB- .
Basis on this , period of the broadcast should be kept two instead of three .
Representatives of television industry and cable network had suggested minister of information and broadcast to discuss these issue in detail .
Even though , they are against the interventions of government and keep faith in the process of self-discipline .
They consider journalist society as a reliable and fully responsible .
Rajdeep says that in the time of 24 hours news channels there is no space for hide anything .
Nothing can remain hidden from twenty-four hours news channels .
The camera is reaching everywhere .
Making everyone accountable .
But editors who questions others should also bear some accountability .
Rajdeep says that Till now I believe that we ourselves can look into ourselves .
We have such power that we can do introspection and can control ourselves .
We do not need any external control .
That ` s why I do not consider broadcasting bill right .
But they know that situation is not the same .
The problem does not end here only .
For this someone is needed .
When we ourselves do not have such self power , then will have to bring some external force .
Now I think some regulatory body definitely should be there .
Some aspects are there in this history , in which we could be able to touch only surface , in which our knowledge is limited to two-three upper scales only .
In last three decades some notable studies are done on this important but dark aspect , because of those field of communication emerged as new horizon of social sciences .
Process of communication and its impacts and results , possibilities and limitations need to be deeply understood .
Area of communication is a area of many intellectual challenges .
Our achievements in this area will prove useful from both perspectives theoretical and practical .
Human beings considers herself a distinctive and of high quality in this world .
It is his arrogance because his many abilities are unique .
These qualifications are not in any other creature .
Because of this human can call herself talented .
In the age of limited means of communication human remained divided into small autonomous units .
Contrary to this , the unprecedented growth of media has converted contemporary world in big village .
Conditions among these poles themselves were also very important .
An internal communication system is implied in creation of human being itself , the cells themselves are able to communicate each other .
Live cells use to communicate through hormones and nerves .
This communication is based on the information collection , which imply in Nubliy acid molecules .
The possibility emerged from contemporary research in this field , they are more important .
Creatures other than human can also communicate .
He communicates their message through Chemical secretions to other members of his race .
A gland use to be in the front of the creature ` s head .
This gland secretes connect male and female each others .
By her smell male Recognizes his female , female to male .
Along with , this smell is also a warning for other members of the race , against break-up of couples .
Second example is of butterfly who is well known from the communication point of view .
Several example of communicating through body movement and speed is also found in butterflies .
Their ` Vegal Dance ` is equally discussed in Biology and Social Sciences .
In 1945 German Biologist Carl Phan Frish had presented analysis of code of conduct imply in this dance .
Labourer butterfly sometime does this dance near its hive .
It can have two meanings .
In this dance she makes shape of English 8 by flying thirteen to fifteen times in a second .
This sequence is repeated several times .
In between she also flies direct .
Dance indicates towards destination , limit of direct flying make us aware of distance of hive and destination .
